
THE GOVERNANCE of Virtue.
How a man should behave him self in the morning when he rises.
When thou resist in the morning, look that thou with all humbleness of mind
knelest down, and lifting up thy heart, thy hands and thine eyes into heaven
unto God the father almighty, pray on this manner.

A prayer for the morning.
O Lord God my heaue^ly father I most humbly thank thee, y^ thou of thy
fatherly goodness hast vouchsafed to defend me this night from all evil: I most
entirely beseech thee, to preserve me also this day, both from suffering and
doing any evil, and to give me grace so to walk in the light of thy holy word,
that I may bring forth ye fruit of y^ same unto the glory of thy blessed name,
and the profit of my neighbour.

Amen.
After thou hast prayed on this manner, seeing we be al sinners, it shall be
expedient (if thou hast convenient leisure) to confess thy self to God on this
manner.

A confession of our sins unto God the father.
MOst grievously have I wretched sinner offe^ded thee my Lord God and heavenly
father, both in thought word and dede, in so much that in my self I u^nde such
unworthiness, that if I did not behold thine exceeding great mercies, set forth
in thy dearly beloved son our Lord and saviour Iesu Christ, I could not but
despair and wholly give my self into the hands of Satan that old enemy of
mankind. But when thorough thy grace and holy working, I loke upon thy mercies
offered frely to all faithful penite^t sinners in thy son Christ Iesus, for
whose sake thou art well pleased with man, and of thy own good will forgeuest
vs al our sins whe^ soever we flee unto thee in his name, I cease to despair,
and begin to conceive an earnest faith and an undoubted hope of obtaining
forgiveness of al my sins in Christ's blood for thy loving and fatherly promise
sake. I therefore poor and wretched sinner, most humbly beseech thee for
Christ's sake, to forgive me al my sins, where with from the day of my birth
unto this present time I have most grievously offended thy fatherly goodness,
and to give me grace so to resist the devil, the world, and the flesh* and so
to order my life according to thy blessed will, that thou may delight in me as
a father in his son, de fend me fro^ all evil, and work in me all good things
unto the glory of thy holy name.

^ After the confession, say the Lords prayer called the Pater noster, and so
commending thy self unto God, faule in hand with some honest and virtuous
exercise, according to thy calling. But whatsoever thou doest, do it with
pureness of hart and singleness of eye* yea, so do it, as though God were
present and look upon thee, as undoubtedly he doth.

Of Dinner.
^ Whe^ the time co^meth, that thou shouldest refresh thy weary and hungry
body, approach unto the table with reverence, and when thou art set, lift up
thy hart, thy hands and thy eyes unto heaven, and pray unto God on this manner.

A prayer before dinner.
O Most gentile God and loving father, which mercifully ^edest al lie uing
creatures, we beseech thee bless vs and all these thy gifts, which we at this
present shall receive of thy beu^ teous hand, for the refreshing of our hungry
bodies, and give vs grace to doo all things unto the glory of thy name,
thorough Iesu Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Of the behaviour at the table in Diner time.
^ Whe^ thou hast thus prayed unto god eat thy meat soberly and christenly:
echo wing all superfluity, surfeting and drouckenship. Consider that thy meat
and thy drink, are the gifts of God, and are reverently and thank fully to bee
received* Remember that in the time of thy repast, thy behaviour be honest and
comely in all things. Let thy communica tion, as the Apostle saith, ve well
savoured and powdered with ^t: that is to say, seasoned with godly wisdom, that
thou may know how to answer every man. Let no fill thy talk proceed out of thy
mouth, but that which is good to edify, when need is, that it may have favour
with the hearers, remem bring that thou shalt give accounts at the day of
judgment, for every idle word that thou speak. Eschew all dissolute and
uncomely laughing, least thou be thereby counted wilde, wa^ton, foolish, and
without good manners. Let thy cou^tenau^ce he grave, sober, modest, gentle, and
^ouyng, toward al that be at the table, and so fashion thy self in gesture,
word and deed, as though God and his angels we^ visibly present at the table:
And when Dinner is done, give thanks to God for his benefits on this manner.

A thanks giving after Dinner.
WE thank thee O heavenly father for this our food, which being sa^ctif^ed by
thy word, thou hast vouchesafe at this present to give vs: wee beseech thee,
that thou wilt also fed our souls with the lively bread of the word, which
comes out of thy mouth, that we receiving at thy merc^full hand, meat both for
our bodies and souls* may live and grow in all godliness unto the glory of thy
blessed name, tho row Iesu Christ our Lord.

Amen.
What is to be done after dinner.
^ After thou hast given thanks unto God for thy repast* return unto thy
labour, and virtuously exercise thy self, according to thy voca tion and
calling. Employ earnest diligence about thy business, and always in thy mind
desire God to bless, to prosper, and to bring to pass all thy counsels,
devises, travails, labours and enterprises. Do not thy work negligently and
deceitfully, but so labour as though God were present and beheld thee, as
unfeignedly he doth. Cursed be he saith Hiere my, that doth the Lords work
deceitfully. Saint Paule also exhorted, that what soever we doo we should do it
heartily, as though we did in unto the Lord, and not unto men: for as much
saith he* as ye know that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of
inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. Yea verily so many as labour or
travail in any virtuous enterprise, they serve God, and of God shall they
receive their reward. Therefore in thy calling labour earnestly and diligently,
what soever thou be, sekyng not only thine own lucre and ^uaunt age: but much
more the glory of God, and the profit of thy neighbour, as the Apostlesayth: do
all things unto the glory of God. Again, let every man look not for his own
profit, but for the profit of other. Charity seeks not her own.

Of Supper.
^ When the time is come* that thou shalt leave of thy work, and prepare thy
self unto supper, eue^ with the same reverence that thou came unto the table at
dinner, come again now: but before thou doest taste any meat, pray on this
manner.

A prayer before Supper.
THe eyes of all things look unto thee, O Lord, and thou gave the^ meat in due
time, thou openest thy hand, and fellest every living creature with the
blessing: vouchesafe, O heaue^ lie father for Christ's sake, mercifully to loke
upon vs, lovingly to bless vs, and liberally to give vs grace so to taste of
these thy creatures, that our bodies being satisfied with the moderate use of
them, we may bee the more able to serve thee our Lord God, and to profit our
neighbour, thorough Iesu Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Of the behaviour at the table in Supper time.
^ After thou hast thus prayed unto GOD* eat thy meat with a cheerful and
thankful mind using the same modesty and honest behaviour, that thou did use at
dinner. And whe^ thou hast supped, give thanks unto god for his benefits on
this wise.

A thanksgiving after Supper.
FOr these thy benefits, wherewith thou hast refreshed our hungry bodies, we
thank thee (most merciful fa there) desiring thee that thou wilt also feed our
souls with y^ lively faith in the blood of thy son Iesu Christ our Lord, that
we beleuyng steadfastly, and working diligently thy holy will, may obtain thy
glorious kingdom, thorough the same Iesu Christ our Lord.

Amen.
What to be done after Supper.
^ When thou hast on this wise give tha^kes unto God, thou may do what thou
wilt, so it be godly and honest* until thou goosed to bed* If thou can rede,
rede thou thy self or else here some other rede part of the holy scriptures,
that may be to the comfort of thy self, and of so many as be with thee, or pass
the time by friendly and honest talk with some of thy lo^yng and trusty
familiares, or else debate with thy self, how thou may most conveniently bring
that to pass, that thou hast to doo the next day following.

Of going to bed.
^ And whe^ the time co^meth, that thou must go to bed thou being in thy
chamber, to cal reme^brau^ce how thou hast spent the day past. If thou
perceives, that you hast offe^ded God in any thing at all, confess thy fault
unto him with a repentant and sorrowful heart* and desire him of his great
mercy for Christ's sake to forgive thee, and promise that unto the uttermost of
thy power, his grace working with thee, thou wilt amend that wherein thou hast
offended, and walk more diligently in the rules of thy profession. Cry with the
Publican. O God be merciful to me a sinner. Cry with that lost son: Father I
have synned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son. Pray with Dauid: for thy names sake. O Lord, for give me my sin for it
is exceeding much. Thus with a faithful hart beleuyng that thy sins are for
given thee, content thy self and quiet thy conscience. If thou perceyuest, that
thou hast that day committed no notable crime* then give to God right hearty
thanks, which by his holy spirit hath wrought the same in thee: and desire him
to increase his gifts in thee, that his glory may be showed in all thy acts and
deeds. This done, prepare thy self to bedward, and when thou art ready to lye
down, lift up thou hart, thy eyes, and thy hands unto heaven, and pray to God
on this manner.

A prayer to be said when we go to bed.
I Tha^ke thee (O heavenly father) by thy dearly beloved Son Iesu Christ our
Lord and Saviour, that of thy free mercy thou hast preserved me this day from
all hurts, and dau^gers.

Uouchesafe also I most humbly beseech thee to keep me this night, and to save
me ftom all mine enemies both bodily and ghostly. Give to my body quietness and
sleep, but let my mind continually watch unto thee, think on thee, and on thy
holy law, that whe^ the cheerful light of y^ day shall spring and appear. I
being whole both in by die and mind, may joyful rise again: be thanckefull unto
thee, and diligent lie walk in my vocation unto the glo rye of thy blessed
name, and the common ditty of my neighbour, thorough Iesus Christ thy son.
Amen.

^ When thou hast thus prayed, lye down in thy bed and say on this manner.

The Prayer.
O Lord God and my heavenly Father, I commend my body and soul into thy hands,
that in Christ which is our life and resurrectio^, thou may defend me from
everlasting death, and give me that blessed and joy full life of immortality,
and that he which is the true light, may pour out the brightenesse of his grace
into my hart, and preserne me both body and soul unto that day of the glorious
resurrection where the faithful with joyful harts shall see thee face to face,
and for ever reign with thee in glory.

Amen
^ Remedies against all kinds of temptations.
Against Idolatry.
^ If that old enemy Satan goes about to persuade thee, that there be ^o gods
then one resist him with these Scriptures.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
I am the Lord thy God. Thou shal^ Exo. 20 have none other gods in my sight.

Understand and mark well that the Deuteronomy. 4 Lord he is God in heaven
aboue, and upon the earth beneath, neither is there Deuteronomy. 6. any other
God besides him. Here Israel, the Lord our god is one Lord. Deuteronomy. 32

Se howe that I, yea that I am the Lord and that there is no god but I.

Hear O my people I will charge Psal. 81 thee, O Israel, that if thou wilt
her^en unto me, there shall no strange god be in thee, neither shalt thou
worship any other god. For I am the Lord thy God.

I am the lord, and there is none other. Essay 4^

I am the Lord, and there is else none, It is I that created light and darkness
I make peace and trouble, yea even I the Lord do all these things.

Am not I the Lord? is there any god but I? A god that is righteous, and such
one as saves, there is none besides me.

Turn unto me all ye coasts of the world and ye shall be saved, for I am God,
and there is else none.

Have we not all one Father? hath Mal. ^ not one god made vs?

^ An example out of the old Testament.
Abraha^ saw three, and worshipped one Gene. 8

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy Math. 4 god, and him only shalt thou serve.

We have but one god, which is the 1. Cor. 8 Father, of whom are all things,
and ^e in him, and one Lord Iesus Christ by whom are al things, and we in him.

There is one Lord, one faith, one ba Ephe. 4. ptisme, one god, and father of
all, which is aboue all, and thorough all, and in you all.

There is one god, and one mediator 1. Tim. 2. between god and man, even the
man Christ Iesu, which gave him self a ra^nsome for all men.

There are three which bear record Ihon. 5. in heaven, the father, the word,
and the holy ghost. And these three are one.

Against infidelity or misbelief.
IF Satan at any time moves thee, unto in fidelity or misbelief, either toward
God or his word, by no means lean unto him, vnt against his temptation enarme
thy selfwith these holy scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
If ye do not believe, there shall no Essay. 7. promise be kept with you.

Thy eyes, O Lord, loke upon faith. ^. 5.

The righteous shall live by faith. Abacu. 2.

I will mary thee unto me in faith, ^ Ose. 2. thou shalt know that I am the
Lord.

The wrath of y^ Lord came upon I Psalm. 78 raell, because they believed not in
god, nor trusted not in his saving health.

The Lord doth appear unto them S^pi. 2 that hath faith in him.

Wo be to the dissolute in hart, that Eccle. ^* ^eleue not god, and therefore
shall they not be defended of him.

In all thy works put thy trust in Eccle. 3^* god from thy whole heart, for
that is the keeping of the commandments. Who so believes gods work takes ^ede
to the commandments: and he that puts his trust in the Lord shall want nothing.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Abraha^ believed god, and it was reckoned Gene. 15. unto him for
righteousness.

Dauid being a young man and of 1. Reg 17. ^itle stature thorough faith in the
name of the Lord of hoastes, fought with that proud monstrous giant Go^iath the
Philistine, and slue him. Dan. ^*

Sidrach Misach, and Abdenago thorough faith, chosed rather to be cast into a
what burning fornace, then at the kings commandment to co^mit Ido latry, and to
worship strange gods.

Daniel thorough faith wished rather Dan. ^* to be cast quick into the den of
Lyons, then by the space of thirty days, not to pray unto the Lord his god,
according to the kings commaundeme^t.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
He that believes and is baptised shall be Mat. 16. saved. But he that believes
not, shall be condemned.

As many as received christ he gave Iohn. 1 them power to be the sons of god,
in that they believe on his name.

As Moses lifted up the serpent in the Ihon. 3. wilderness: so must the son of
ma^ be lifted up, ye so many as believe in him may not perish, but have
everlasting life. For god hath so dearly beloved the world, that he gave his
only begot ten son, that every one that believes in him, may not perish, but
have everlasting life.

He that believes in y^ son of god, is not condemned. But he that believes not,
is already condemned, because he hath not believed in the name of the only
begotten son of god.

He that believes in the son hath everlasting life, but he that believes not in
the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of god abides upon him.

This is the will of him that sent me Iohn. 6* that every one that sees the son
and believes on him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at
the last day.

I am the resurrectio^ and life, he that Ihon. 1^. believes in me, although he
were dead yet shall he live, and every one that lie ueth and believes in me,
shall not dye everlastingly.

Ye believe in god, believe also in me, Ihon. 14. saith Christ.

Be i^ knowe^ unto you, ye me^ and bre Acts. 89. throne, that thorough the name
of Christ is preached unto you ye forgiveness of sins, and that by him are all
that believe *15. justified from all things, from the which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses.

With faith doth God purify our Acts. 1^ hearts.

The righteousness that is allowed Rome. ^* before god co^meth by the faith of
Iesu ^ Christ unto all, and upon all that believe

We being justified by faith are at Rome. ^. peace with god, thorough our lord
Iesu christ by whom we have a way in, tho row faith unto this grace, wherein we
stand, and rejoice in hope of the praise that shall be given of god.

Christ is the perfect fulfilling of the Rome 10. law, to justify every one y^
believes.

If you wilt knowledge with thy mouth Essay. 28. that Iesus is the lord, and
believe with thy hart, that God raises him from death, thou shalt be saved. For
the belief of the hart justifies, and to knowledge with the mouth makes a man
safe. For ye scripture saith: who soever believes on him, shall not be ashamed.

What soever is not of faith is sin. ^m. 14.

All ye are sons of god, because ye ^lla. 3. have believed in Christ Iesu.

In Christ Iesu neither is circu^cision ^la. 4. any thing worth, nor
vncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

By grace are ye saved thorough faith, ^e. ^. ye and that not of your selves.
It is the gift of god, and comes not of works, because no man should boast him
self.

Aboue all things take unto you the ^. ^. shield of faith whereby ye may be
able to que^ch al the fire darts of the devil. Hob. 11.

Without faith it is not possible to please god. For he that comes unto god,
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder to the^ that seek him.

Be ye sover and watch, for your adversary 1. Pet. 5. the devil goes about like
a to iring Lyon, seking whom he may devour, whom see that ye resist with a
strong faith.

This is the victory which overcome meth the world, even our faith.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
The woman that was diseased by Math. 9. the space of. 12. years of the bloody
issue, thorough faith was made whole.

The woman of Canane thorough Math. 15. faith, obtained of Christ health for
her daughter.

The father of the child possessed with Mar. 9. a devil from his childhood,
obtained of Christ thorough faith, perfect health for his son.

Bartimeus the blind man thorough Mar. 1^. faith recovered his sight.

A certain sinful woman thorough Luke. 7 faith obtained of Christ forgiveness
of all her sins.

The Apostles of Christ thorough faith Acts. 5 notwithsta^ding y^ hye priests
co^mau^dment, continued in the preaching of Christ's gospel, and both
pacie^tly, joy fully, and tha^kefully, suffered al kinds of displeasure for y^
name of y^ Lord Iesu. Rede ye. 11. chap. of the Epistle unto the Hebrues, where
thou shalt find ple^ty of examples concerning this matter.

Against the heresy of such as deny Iesu Christ, to be God.
IF Satan at any time moves thee to doubt of the godhood of Christ as though he
were only man and not God, a creature or a thing made, and not the creator and
maker of all things, enarme thy self against him with these scriptures.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
Unto vs a child is borne, and unto Essay. 9. vs a son is given, upon his
shoulder doth the kingdom lie, and he is called we his own name, wonderful, the
giver of cou^cell, the mighty god, y^ everlasting father y^ prince of peace.
and ^

In that day it shall be said: Lo, this is Essay. 25 our god, we have waited
for him, and he shall save vs. This is the Lord, in who^ we have hoped, we
shall be merry and rejoice in the salvation that comes of him.

They shall see the glory of y^ Lord, and Essay. 35 the majesty of our god. And
therefore stre^gth the weak hands, and co^fort the feeble knees, say unto the^
y^ are of a fear full hart, be of good chere and fear not.

Behold your god co^meth to take ve^geaunce, and you shall see the reward ye
god gives. God comes his own self, and will deliver you. The^ shall the eyes of
the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf opened. Then shall the lame
ma^ leap as an hart, and the dumme mans tongue shall be losoned.

O that thou would cleave y^ heavens Essay. 64 in sonder, and come down.

Behold, I see four men going lose Dan. 4 in the midst of the fire, and nothing
hurt, and the fourth is like the son of god to look upon.

Out of Egipt have I called my son. Ose. 11

This is our god, and there shall none other Baru. 5 be co^pared unto him. It
is he that hath found out all wisdom, and hath given her unto Iacob his
servant, and to Israel his beloved.

Afterword did he show him self upon earth, and dwelt among men.

The Lord said unto me, thou art my Psal. 2. son, this day have I begotten
thee.

Thy seat (O god) endures for ever, Psal. 45 the sceptre of thy kingdom is a
right sceptre.

The Lord him self had me in possession Prou. 7. in the beginning of his ways,
or ever he bega^ his works before time. I have been ordained from everlasting,
and from the beginning or ever the earth was made.

When I was borne, there were net there depths nor springs of water. Be fore
the foundacio^s of the mou^taynes, were laid, yea before all hills was I borne.
The earth and all that is upon the earth, was not yet made, no not ye ground it
self. For when he made the heaue^s I was present, when he set up y^ depths in
order, whe^ he hanged the clouds aboue, when he fastened the springs of the
deep, when he shut the sea within certain bounds, that the waters should not go
over their marks that he co^maunded. When he laid the foundacions of the earth,
I was with him, ordering all things, deleting daily, and rejoicing always
before him.

I came out of the most highest, first borne before all creatures.

I caused the light that fails not Eccle. 24. to arise in the heaven, and
covered all the earth as a cloud.

I will be his father, and he shall be 2. Reg. 7. my son.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
WHen god created the earth and all Gene. 1. things therein, he said: Let vs
make manne in our Image, after our own likeness: this word, vs. doth evidently
declare that there bee three perso^s in the godhood, the father, and the son,
and the holy ghost. Whereof it manifestly followed, that as the father is god,
and the holy ghost god, so likewise is the son god, yea true and natural god,
hegotten of god the Father from everlasting.

Abraham saw three, and worshipped Gen. 18 one, saying: Lord I beseech thee, if
I have found favour in thy sight, go not away from thy servant.

^ Here it is evident also, that there are three persons in the deity, and yet
notwithstanding they three are one God. Therefore like as the first and the
second persons in the deity are ve rye God (I mean the father and the holy
ghost) so likewise is the second person in, the trinity, I mean the son, true
and natural God, worthy all honour and glory for evermore.

GOd said unto Moses I am the god Exod. 3 of thy father, the god of Abraha^,
the god of Isaac, and the god of Iacob.

^ Here also is evidently declared the blessing and glorious trinity, and that
there be three persons in the godhood, and yet one God: so that as the father
is God and the holy ghost God: so likewise is the son God.

IN the same year that king Osiah Essay. 6 dyed, I saw the Lord, saith the Pro
photo Essay, sitting upon an high and glorious feat, and his train filled the
temple. And about him stood Seraphins, whereof every one had. 6. wings With
twain eche covered his face, with twain his feet, and with twain did he flee.
They cried also eche one to another on this manner. Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of hostess. The whole world is full of his glory.

^ This word holy, thryse rehearsed, doth also manifestly declare that there
are three per sons in the godhood, and that they three are one God: Christ
therefore the second person in the Trinity, is very God.

King Nabuchodonosor commanded Dan. 4 these three men, Sidrach Misach and
Abdenago, to be cast into an exceeding hot burning oven, because they would not
become Idolatours and at his commandment, fall down and worship the golden
Image. And whe^ they were bound in their coats, bosen, shoes, with their other
garments and caste into the hot burning oven, the king looked into the oven,
and said unto his counsel: did ye not cast these three men bound into the fire?
They au^swered unto the king, yea, O king. He answered and said, lo for all
that, yet doo I see four men going lose in the midst of the fire, and nothing
corrupt, and the fourth is like the son of god to look upon.

Here is a manifest testimony yt Iesu Christ is the son of God, and God
himself, as we shall evidently learn of the histories of the new Testament.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
His name shall be called Emanuel, Mat. 1 which is by interpretation, God with
vs, or God and man.

This is my well-beloved son, in Mat. 3. 17 whom I have great pleasure.

Thou art Christ the son of the living Mat, 16 God.

Without all doubt this was the Math. 27 son of God.

He shall be great, and shall be called Luc, 1 the son of the most highest.

That holy thing which shall be born, shall be called the son of God.

In the beginning was the word, and y^ Ihon. 1. word was with god and the word
was god

We saw the glory of the word, as the glory of the only begotten son of the
father.

No man hath scene god at any time, the only begotten son: which is in the
bosom of the father, he hath declared him. Thou art the son of god, y^ art the
king of Israel.

He that believes not, is condemned Iohn. 3. already, because he believes not
in the name of the only begotten son of god. The father loves the son and hath
given all things into his hand. He that believes the son hath everlasting life,
and he that believes not on the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of god
abides on him.

I am that living bread, which came Iohn. 6. down from heaven.

Except ye believe that I am the son Iohn. 8. of god, ye shall dye in your
sins.

I and my father are one. Iohn. 10.

I believe that you art Christ the son of Iohn. 11. god, which should come into
the word.

Doest thou not believe, that I am in Iohn. 14. the father. and the father is
in me?

This is everlasting life, even to Iohn. 17. know thee the alone true God, and
whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ.

O father thou loved me before the Iohn. 20. world was made.

These things are written, that ye might believe, that Iesus is Christ the son
of god: and that in beleuyng ye life thorough his name.

Iesus Christ was declared to be the Rome. 2. son of god with power of y^ holy
ghost.

Christ is the image of the invisible Colos. 1. god, first begotten of al
creatures. For by him were all things created, things that are in heaven and
things that are on earth, things visible and things invisible, whether they be
majesty or lord ship, either rule or power. All things are created by him and
in him, and he is before all things, and in him all things have their being.

We look for that blessed hope and Titus. 2 glorious appearing of the great god
and our saviour Iesu Christ.

God in time past diversely and many Hebr. 1. ways spake unto the Fathers by
the Prophets, but in these last days he hath spoken unto vs by his Son, who he
hath made heir of all things, by whom also hee made the world. Which Son being
the brightness of his glory, and very image of his substance, bearing up all
things with the word of his power, has in his own person purged our sins, and
is sitting on the right hand of the majesty on hie, and is more excellent then
the angels, in as much as he has by inheritance obtained a more excelle^t name
then they have. For unto which of the angels said be at any time. Thou art my
son, this day begat I Psal. 2. thee. And again, I will be his father and he
shall be my son.

And again, when he brings in Act. 13. the first begotten son into y^ world, he
saith: and all the angels of god shall worship him. And of the angels he saith:
he makes his angels sprites, and his ministers flames of fire. But unto the son
he saith: God, thy seat shall be for ever and ever. The sceptre of thy kingdom
is a right sceptre.

Iesus Christ yesterday and to day, Hob. 13. and the same co^tinueth for ever.
Who is a lier, but he that denies that Iesus is Christ? The same is the
Antichrist that denies the father and the son: who so ever denies the son, y^
same hath not the father. Let therefore abide in you that same, which ye heard
from the beginning. If that which ye heard from the beginning shall remain in
you: ye also shall continue in the son and in the father, and this is the
promise that he hath promised vs, even everlasting life.

For this purpose appeared y^ son ^. Iohn. 3. of god, to lose the works of the
devil.

This is gods commaundeme^t that we believe on the name of his son Ie suss
Christ.

In this appeared the love of god towards ^. Iohn. 4. vs, because y^ god sent
his only begotten son into the world that we might live thorough him.

Who is it, that overcomes the ^. Iohn. 5. world, but he which believes that
Iesus is the son of god.

God has given unto vs eternal life, and this life is in his son. He that hath
the son, has life, and he that hath not the son of god, hath not life.

We know that the son of god is come, and has given vs a mind to know him which
is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his son Ie suss Christ. The
same is very god and eternal life.

Examples out of the new Testament.
God the Father proclaimed Iesu Mat. 3. 17. ^ Christ both when he was baptised
and transfigured, his only begotten, natural and well-beloved son, saying: this
is my dearly beloved son, in who^ I have great pleasure.

Two men possessed with devils called Math. 8. Iesu the son of god saying: O
Iesu the son of god, what have we to do with thee Math. 13.

The men which were in the ship, se yng that the wind ceased so soon as Christ
was come into the ship, said unto him, truly thou art the son of god.

When Christ demanded o^f his dis Math. 17. ciples, whom they thought him to
be, Peter in the name of all the disciples answered and said: thou art Christ
the son of the living god.

When bishop Cayphas said unto Math. 26. Christ, I charge thee in the name of
ye living god, that thou tell vs whether thou be Christ the son of god, Christ
answered: thou hast said. Nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see
the son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and come in the clouds of
the sky.

Whe^ the Centurion and they that Math. 26. were with him watching Iesus, saw
the earthquake, and those things which happened they feared greatly, saying: Of
a surety this was the son of god.

They brought to Christ a ma^ sick Math. 9. of the palsy, lying in his bed, and
whe^ Iesus saw the faith of them, he said to the sick of the palsy, son be of
good chere. Thy sins be forgiven thee. And behold certain of the Scribes said
in the^selues, this man blasphemes. And when Iesus saw their thoughts, he said:
wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Here Christ proves himself god against
all his enemies two manner of ways. First, in that he forgives sins. For no man
can forgive sin but god alone. Secondly, in that be knows the very hid and
secret thoughts of men. For who searches the hearts and rains of men but god
only.

When a certain man possessed with Mar. 15 an unclean spirit saw christ a far
of, he came running and worshipped him, and cried with a loud voice, saying:
What have I to do with thee, O Iesu, thou son of the most highest god?

The high priest asked Iesu^ and said Mar. 14 unto him, art thou Christ the son
of the blessed? He answered, I am. And ye shall see the son of man sitting on
the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

Christ said unto Nathanaell: Before Ihon. 1. ^ that Philip called thee, whe^
thou wast under the ^ygtree, I saw thee. Na thanaell answered and said unto
him, Rabbi, thou art even the very son of god, thou art the king of Israel.
Iesus answered and said unto him: Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under
the figtree, thou beleuest: thou shalt see greater things then these. And he
said unto them, verily verily, I say un to you, hereafter shall ye see heaven
open, and the angels of god asce^dyng and descending over the son of ma^.

The miracle which Christ wrought Iohn. ^* at the marriage in Cana by turning
water into wine, proves him manifestly to be god.

After the sermon that Christ made Iohn. 6. of the eating of his flesh, and the
drinking of his blood, many of his Disciples understanding his words grossly
(as the papists doo understand the words of the Lords Supper) went back and
forsook him, and walked no more with him. Then said Iesus to y^ twelve, will ye
also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou
haste the words of eternal life, and we believe and are sure that thou art
Christ the son of the living god.

Iesus heard that the Jaws had excommunicate Iohn. 9. the blind man, whom he
had made to see, and when he had found him, he said unto him: doest thou
believe on the son of god? He answered and said: who is it Lord y^ I might
believe on him? And Iesus said unto him, thou hast scene him, and he it is y^
takes with thee. And he said, lord I believe, and he worshipped him.

Martha said unto Christ, I believe y^ Iohn. 11. thou art Christ the son of god
which should come into the world.

Iesus said to Thomas, bring thy Ihon. 20. finger hither, and see my hands and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be no more faithless but
believing. Thomas answered and said unto him: My Lord and my god. Iesus said
unto him: Thomas, because thou hast seen me thou hast believed, blessed are
they that have not scene, and yet have believed.

The Eunuch said unto Phillip: see Acts. ^. here is water, what doth let me to
bee baptised? Phillip said unto him. If thou believe with all thine heart thou
majesty. And he answered and said, I believe y^ Iesus Christ is the son of god.

The restoring of y^ blind to their sight the raising up of the dead unto life,
the cle^sing of the lepers, the healing of the^ that were diseased with the
palsy, the restoring of men possessed with devils and unclean spirits to their
whole mind, the making of the deaf to hear, and the dumme to speak, with the
other mi racles that Christ wrought, do evidently prove Christ to be the
natural son of god, yea and god himself.

Against the heresy of them which hold that Iesus Christ the son of God toke no
flesh of Mary his mother.
^ I feyther Satan with his subtle suggesti once, or any of his decetifull work
men with their crafty reasons and falsifiyng the holy scrip tures, go about to
persuade thee that Iesus Christ the son of God, took no flesh of that blessed
virgin Mary his mother, but brought his body with him from heaven, enarme thy
sel^e with these authorities of gods word against their pestilent and damnable
darts.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
I will set enmity between thee and Gene 3. the woman, between thy seed and her
seed. The very self same seed shall tread down thy head, and thou shalt tread
upon his heal.

In thee all kynreds of the earth shall be blessed.

In thy seed shall all the nations of Gene. 22. the earth be blessed.

The sceptre shall not depart from Gene. 49. Iuda, and a law giver from between
his fete, until S^lo come, and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.
He shall bind his foal unto the vine, and his Asses colt unto the branch. He
washed his garment in wine, and his man till in the blood of grapes. His eyes
are redder then wine, and his teethe whiter then milk.

There shall come a star of Iacob and Number. 24 raise a Sceptre of Israel. Out
of Iacob shall he come that shall have dominion.

I will raise them up a Prophet from Deuteronomy. ^ among their brethreb like
un to thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them
all that I shall co^mau^d him, and whosoever will not har ken unto the words
which hee shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

I will set up thy sede after thee, which 1. Par. 1^ shall be of thy sons, and
will stablish his kingdo^. He shall build me an house and I will stablish his
seat for ever. I will bee his father, and he shall bee my son, and I will not
put away my mercy from him, as I did from him y^ was before thee, but I will
set him in my house, and in my kingdom for ever, and his seat shall be sure for
ever.

I have sworn once by my holiness, y^ Psal. 89 I will not fail Dauid. His seed
shall endure for ever, and his seat also like as the sun before me. He shall
stand for ever more as the moon, and as the faithful witness in heaven.

The Lord hath made a faithful other Psalm. 132 unto Dauid, and he shall not
shrink fro^ it, out of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon thy seat.

Behold a Virgin shall conceive and Essay. 7. bear a son, and shall call his
name Emanuell.

Unto vs a child shall be borne, and unto Essay. 9. vs a child shall be given,
vpo^ his shoulder shall the kingdom lye, and he shall be called with his own
name, the wont rous giver of council, the mighty god the everlasting father, ye
prince of peacer he shall make no end to increase the kingdom and peace, and
shall sit upon the seat of Dauid, and in his kingdom to set up the same, to
establish it with equity and rightousnes from henceforth for ever more. This
shall the gelousy of the Lord of hostess bring to pass.

There shall come a rod forth of the kin Essay. 11. dred of Iesse, and a
blosso^ out of his root. The spirit of the Lord shall light upon it, the spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of council and stre^gth the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of god, andc.

Behold the time comes saith the Iere. 23. Lord, that I will raise up the
righteous branch of Dauid, which shall bear rule, and discuss matters with
wisdo^, and set up equity and righteousness again in earth. In his time shall
Iuda be saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear. And this is the name yt
they shall cal him, eue^ ye lord our rightous maker. Iohn. 29.

Behold the time comes saith the lord, that I will perform the good thing which
I have promised unto the house of Israel, and to the house of Iuda. In those
days and at the same time. I will bring forth unto Dauid the branch of
righteousness, and he shall doe equity and righteousness in the land. In those
days shall Iuda be helped, and Jerusalem shall dwell safe, and he that shall
call her, is even god our righteous maker. For thus the Lord god promises:
Dauid shall never want one to sit upon the stole of the house of Israel.

I will raise up unto them one only Eze. 34, 37 shepherd even my servant Dauid,
he shall feed them and he shall be their shepherd, I the Lord will bee their
god, and my servant Dauid shall be their prince. Even I the Lord has spoken it.

Understand this and mark it well, Dan. 9. that from the time it shall be
concluded to go and to repair Jerusalem again, unto Christ, there shall be
seven weeks. Then shall the streets and walls be builded again, 62. weeks, but
with heard trow blous time. After these 62. weeks shall Christ be slain, and
they shall have no pleasure in him.

Thou Bethelem Ephrata art little Mesh. 5. among the thousands of Iuda, out of
thee shall come unto me, which shall bee the governor in Israel, whose out go
ing hath been from the beginning and from everlasting. Zach. ^.

Be glad and rejoice O daughter of Zion: for lo, I come to dwell in y^ midst of
thee, saith the Lord. At the same time there shall many heathen clean to the
Lord, and shall be my people.

Behold I will send my messenger Mal. 3 which shall prepare the way before me
and y^ Lord whom ye would have, shall soon come to his temple, ye even the
Messenger of the covenant whom ye look for.

This is our god, and there shall none Barue. ^. other be compared to him. It
is he that hath found out all wisdom, and has given her unto Iacob his servant,
and to Israel his beloved. Afterword did he show himself upon earth, and dwelt
among men.

Examples out of the old Testament.
AFter that Adam and his wife thorough the crafty persuasions of Satan had
transgressed gods commandment, god in the presence of them both, even for their
comfort and for the quietness of their conscience, said unto the ser pent. I
will set enmity between thee and a woman, between thy seed and her sede. The
self same seed shall tread down thy head, and thou shalt tread upon his heel.

These words of God the father spoke^ unto the serpent, show evidently and
manifestly prove, that Iesu Christ our Lord is the true and natural son of
Mary, and unfeignedly took his flesh and humanity of her. For this word seed,
in this place signifies the whole substance of Christ's manhood, and proves
evidently, that whatsoever Christ was being man, he truly and naturally
received it of the corporal substance of Mary his mother the virgin. Cursed
therefore is the heretike Appeals, which thought that Christ had received his
body of the elements in the ayre, and passed through the virgin, as the water
passed through a pipe. Cursed are these heretikes Cerdo, Martian and Manes,
which hold that Christ had a fantastical body, appearing to be man, and pet
having no part of manhood in him. Cursed is that heretike Ualentinus with his
Apes the Anabaptistes, which hold that Christ took no flesh of Mary his mother
the virgin, but brought his body with him fro^ heaven. God the father calls
Christ the seed of the woma^. He therefore is the natural son of Mary his
mother, and received his whole bodily substance of the most pure virgin or else
should God greatly have erred, which called him the seed of a woma^, but let
God be true and all heretikes liars.

TO Abraham god the father said: in Gene. 22. thy sede all nations of the earth
shall be blessed.

This sede is Christ, as S. Paul decla Gala. 3. reth to the Galathians, which
borne of the virgin Mary, came of the sede of Abraham.

^ Now if Christ had taken no flesh of Mary, how could he have come of the sede
of Abraha^? But that we should be without all doubt co^cernyng Christ's
humanity, and be certain that he was the true and natural son of Mary, re
ceiuyng his manhood neither of the elements of the ayre, nor yet bringinning it
with him fro^ heaven, but taking it of the true and natural substance of Mary
his mother. God saith expressly: In thy seed. Let vs note well this pronoun.
Thy. In thy sede saith he, and not in the sede that Christ shall bring from
heaven, or out of the ayre. Howe could Christ justly haubene called Abrahams
sede, if he had never taken any part of Abrahams substance? But the Apostle
saith: Christ toke the sede of Abraham, and not of the angels, so that he must
be like to his brothers in all things. Let God therefore be true, and all
heretikes liars.

In like manner the Lord swore a truth Psal. 1^* unto Dauid, and will not go
from it. I will saith he, set upon thy seat one of the fruit of the womb. Here
Christ, which before was called the sede of a woman, and the sede of Abraha^,
is called the fruit of Dauids wo^be.

^ What ca^ be spoken more plainly, to declare and prove, that Christ came of
the sede of Dauid as concerning his flesh? If Christ be the fruit of Dauids
belly, I mean concerning his posterity (for Mary the mother of Christ, came of
the stock and kindred of Dauid) so doth it evidently follow that Christ passed
not thorough the wo^be of his mother without any part^ king of y^ natural
substa^ce of his mother as y^ wa la passes and runs thorough the pipe, and yet
receives no part of the pypes substance, but rather that he took a perfect body
of substance of his mother, and so became true and perfect man. Otherwise
should not he have ben the fruit of Dauids belly, neither should God have kept
his other and promise made unto Dauid. But let God be true and all heretikes
liars.

THe Prophet Essay doth lively describe, Essay. 7. paint and set forth both the
mother of Christ, and Christ him self in these words: The Lord, saith he, shall
give you a token. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou shalt
cal his name Emanuel, But la and honey shall he eat, y^ he may know to refuse
the evil and chose the good.

^ First as concerning Christ's mother, we learn here that she was a pure and
vnde^yled maid, and that she, and not the heaven nor the ayre conceived and
brought forth Christ her son. In that she conceived and brought forth Christ,
it is evident that she was unfeignedly Christ's natural mother, ministres part
of her ^bstaunce to the performing and making a^ her son thorough Gods
operation, and did the duty and office of a true mother in all points. And
where as the Prophet calls Christ her ^onne he declares manifestly. that Christ
took his flesh of the substance of his mother Mary the virgin, and is her true
and natural son, or else to what end should he bee called hee son? And that we
should be as assuredly persuaded of his humanity of Mary his mother, as of his
deity of God his father. The Prophet calls him Emanuell, that is to say, God
and man, true God of God his father, an^ true man of Mary his mother. And
because there should want nothing unto the true perfect and full dis cription
of Christ's humanity, but that Christ should be declared to bee a true and a
natural child, and not fantastical nor celestial the Pro phet as it were with
certain notes and marks both lively set forth, and shows that he after that
manner of other children shall eat butter and Honey, that is to say, refuse
butter and unsavoury meat^s, and chose those that are sweet and plea saunt in
taste. This were vainly put in of the Prophet, if Christ had no been a natural
child, taking his flesh or the substance of Mary his mother, and not bringing
his body with him from heaue^, or I know not from whence, as the ungodly
Anabaptistes in these our days do most fastly dream. But let God be true, and
all heretikes liars.

IN another place the Prophet saith, Essay. 11. there shall come a rod forth of
the kindred of Iesse, and a flower shall flourish out of his root.

^ In this place the Prophet doth so openly declare Christ to be true man and
the natural son of Mary the virgin, that it is won der that any Heretic can
have so w^oryshe a forehead once to deny i^. This rod and ^loure, which springs
out of rod and kint^ ^ Iesse, is Christ the Lord* The root out of the which
flower undefiled virgin Mary. Christ's mother, which came of the kindred of
Iesse, king Dauids father. Can any man deny, but that the flower is of the same
nature and substance that the tree is of, which bears the flower? If we grau^t
the flower to be of the na ture and substa^ce of the stock that bears the
flower, why are the Anabaptistes more wicked and cruel against Christ the
flower and fruit (by Gods ordinance) of the holy virgin, then unto the stock
and root of every flower of the field? Can the flower of an Ora^ge spring out
o^ an Ok? No more can the humanity of Christ which is the blossom and flower of
Mary, take his original of the ayre, of heaven, or of such other matter they
know not what. But as the flower of the Ora^ge springs out of the Ora^ge tree,
and is of the very same nature and substa^ce that the Ora^ge tree is, so
likewise Christ being the flower of the most blessed Virgin took his beginning
of her, and is of the very same substance and nature that she is. Let God
therefore be true, and all heretikes liars.

AFter the. 62. weeks, saith the Prophet Daniell, shall Christ be slain, Dan.
9. and they shall have no pleasure in him.

^ The sleyng of Christ evidently proves that Christ was v^y man, yea and a ma^
mortal and subject unto death, so well as we. If he had brought his body with
him from heaven* so had been a celestial body* an impossible and immortal body.
But for as much as Christ feared death* ^uffed the pains of death, yea and dyed
in ded^, according to the Scriptures, it follows that Christ was true and
unfeigned man, taking his humanity of that holy virgin Mary his mother, and
lived in all points like man, sin alone extep^e, and at the last dyed for our
sins* as the Apostle saith. Let God therefore be true, and all heretikes liars.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
THe book of the kindred of Iesus Mal. 1 Christ the son of Dauid the son of
Abraham.

Iacob begat Ioseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was borne that Iesus which is
called Christ.

The birth of Iesus Christ was on this wise. Whe^ his mother Mary was married
to Ioseph, before they came together, she was found with child by the holy
ghost. Then Ioseph her husband being a perfect man and loath to defame her, was
minded to put her away secret lie. While he thus thought, behold the angel of
the Lord appeared unto him in a dream saying: Ioseph the son of Dauid, fear not
to take unto thee Mary thy wife. For that which is conceived in her, is of the
holy ghost. She shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Iesus.
For he shall save his people from their sins. All this was done to fulfil y^
which was spoke^ of the Lord by the Prophet Essay, saying: behold Essay. 7. a
maid shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his
name Emanuell, which is by interpretation GOD with vs, or God and man.

The angel gabriel was sent from god unto a city of galile named Nazareth, to a
virgin spoused to a ma^ whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid, and the
virgins name was Mary. And the au^gel went in unto her, and said: Hail full of
grace, y^ Lord is with thee? Blessed art thou among women.

When she saw him, she was abashed at his saying, and caste in her mind, what
manner of salutation that should be. And the angel said unto her: fear not
Mary, for thou hast fou^d grace with god, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and
bear a son, and shalt call his name Iesus. He shall be great, and shall be
called the son of the highest. And the Lord god shall g^ue unto him the sea ^
of his father Dauid, and he shall reign over the house of Iacob for ever, and
of his kingdom shall be none end. Then ^ayd Mary unto the angel: howe shall
this bee, saying I know not a mane And the angel answered and said unto her:
the holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne of thee,
shall be called the son of god.

Elizabeth was filled with the holy ghost, and cried with a loud voice and
said: Blessed art thou among women, ^ blessed is y^ fruit of thy womb. And
whence happens this to me, that the mo there of my Lord should come to me.
andc.

It fortunate while they were there, her Luke. ^ time was come y^ she should be
delivered. And she brought forth her first begotte^ son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no rome for the^
within y^ Inn.

Behold I bring you tidings of great ^oy, y^ shall come to all y^ people. For
unto you is borne this day y^ city of Dauid ^ saviour, which is Christ the
Lord.

The child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom and the
grace of god was with him.

Iesus increased in wisdom and age and in favour with god and man.

Blessed is the womb that bare thee, Luke. 11 and the papes which gave thee
suck.

The word was made flesh and dwelt Iohn. 1 among vs.

Dauid was a Prophet and knew that Acts. 2. god had sworn with an other to him,
y^ the fruit of his loins, that is to say Christ, should sit on his seat.

God did set up Dauid to be their Acts. 13 king, of whom he reported, saying, I
have found Dauid the son of Iesse, a man after my own heart, he shall fulfil
all my will. Of this mans sede hath god according to his promise, brought forth
to the people of Israel a saviour, even Iesus.

Iesus Christ the son of god was be Rome. 1. gotten of the seed of Dauid as
pertaining to the flesh.

Christ as concerning the flesh came Rome. 9 of the Israelites.

To Abraham and his seed were the Gal. 13 promises made. He saith not in the
sedes as many, but in thy seed, as in one, which is Christ.

When the time was full come, God Gala. ^. sent his Son borne of a woman, and
made bound unto the law, to redeem them, which were under the law, that we
thorough election might receive the inheritance that belo^geth unto the natural
son.

Christ being in the shape of GOD Phil. ^ and thinking it no robbery to equal
with God, nevertheless made him self of no reputa^ion, and toke on him y^ shape
of a servant, and became like unto men and was found in his apparel as a man.

Without doubt great is this mystery 1. Timo. 3 of godliness, God was showed in
the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was scene of angels, was preached unto
the gentles, was believed on in earth and received up in glory.

Remember that Iesus Christ being 2. Tim. ^ of the seed of Dauid, rose again
from death according to my gospel.

He that sanctifieth, and they which Hebr. ^ are sanctified are all of one. For
which causes sake he is not ashamed to cal the^ brethre^, saying. I will
declare thy name to my brethre^, and in the midst of the congregation will I
praise thee. And again, I will put my trust in him. And again, behold here am
I, and the children which god hath geue^ me. For as much then as the children
were partakers of flesh and blood, he also him self likewise took part with
them for to put down thorough death him that had Lordship over death, that is
to say, the devil, and that he might deliver them, which thorough fear of death
were all their life time in dau^ger of bo^dage. For he in no condition takes on
him the au^gels, but the sede of Abraham takes he on him. Wherefore in all
things it became him to be made like unto his brethre^, that he might be
merciful and a faithful his priest in things concerning god for to purge y^
peoples sins. For that it fortunate him self to be te^pted, he is hable to
succour them also that are tempted.

Dearly beloved, believe not every spy ^ Iohn. 4. rit, but prove the spirits
whether they are of God, or not. For many false Pro photos are gone out into
the world. Hereby shall ye know the spirit of god. Every spirit that confesses
that Iesus Christ is come in y^ flesh, is of god. And every spirit, which
co^fesseth not y^ Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of god. And this is
the spirit of Antichrist, of who^ ye have hard, how y^ ^e should come, and even
now already is he in the world.

Many deceivers are entered into the Iohn. ^. world, which confess not that
Iesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an Antichrist.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
WHen the time was come y^ the blessed Luke. ^ promised sede should be borne.
God sent his messenger Gabriel vnt^ that holy Virgin Mary, which was of the
house of Dauid which among ma ny other things said unto her: fear not mary. For
thou hast found grace with God. Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and
bear a Son. andc.

^ Note that the angel saith, thou shalt conceive. He saith not, heaven shall
conceive. And the angel like as the Prophet used this word conceive, to declare
that the flesh which Christ had, was truly and naturally taken of the substance
of his mother Mary the virgin. For to conceive, is none other thing, than a
woman to be a very true and natural mother by ministering part of her corporal
substance to her child, whereof also the child is formed and made. Now on this
manner by the working of the holy ghost without the sede of man did this
blessed virgin conceive Christ, it therefore truly followed, that Christ
brought not his body with him from heaven but received it of the natural
substance of his mother Mary. And because we should not doubt of this thing,
the angel calls Iesus Maries son. If Christ had not ta ken his humanity of the
blessed Virgin, of her nature and substance, and so be made very true and
perfect man, the angel had not said truth, when he called Christ her son. For
neither should Mary have been Christ's mother, nor Christ Maries son. And so
should the angel have brought a false and a lying message from God, which is
the self truth. But let God be true, and all heretikes liars.

^ The godly and virtuous woma^ Elizabeth, wife to ^acharie the priest, said to
Mary her Co sen, being newly conceived with child, thorough the operation of
the holy ghost: blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb. And whence happens this unto me, y^ the mother of my lord should come
unto me? what soever this holy woman saith here, it must needs bee believed as
an infallible truth. For she speaks not of her own head, but as she was filled
with the holy ghost. In this her salutation: she calls Christ the fruit of
Maries womb. If Christ bee the fruit of Marries womb as vndobutedlye hee is,
then is Christ made of the substance of Mary, and is her true and natural son,
or else were it a manifest lye to call Christ the fruit of her womb. Who is so
mad, to call a thing the fruit of a tree, that never had the nature of a tree?
Were it not double madness to call a pear the fruit of a cheri tree? so great a
fondness and a greater lye had it been to call Christ the fruit of Maries womb,
if he had brought his body with him from heaven or from any other place. But as
it is truly said this pear is the fruit of a pear tree, because it had his
being and natural substance of the nature and substance of a pear tree, so
likewise is it truly said Christ is the fruit of Maries womb, because he had
his being and natural substance as concerning his humanity of the nature and
substa^ce of Mary. Let God therefore be true, and all heretikes liars.

IEsus saith Luke, grew in wisdom Luke. 12 and age, this also declares Christ
to to be true man, saying he grew in age and strength of body yea and also in
wisdom after the manner of other children, all though in the gifts of the mind
he far excelled all other men, as the Scriptures testify. God saith Dauid, even
thy God hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness aboue thy fellows. S. Ihon
Baptist also spea keth of Christ on this manner. God gives not the spirit by me
sure unto him.

^ If Christ had brought his body with him ^o^ heaven so could not Christ's
body have ben a natural body, nor have grown after the man ner of other
children but should have been as big when it came from heaven into the Virgins
womb, as it was on the same day that it was put to death. But the holy
Scriptures teach vs, that Christ is the fruit of Marries womb, that he is her
son, that he was borne a little child, and grew in age after the manner of
other children until he became a perfect man. It therefore truly follows, that
he brought not his body with him from heaven, or I know not from whence* as the
wicked Anabaptistes teach at this present, but that he unfeignedly, took it of
Mary his mother* and is her true and natural son formed and made of the nature
and substance of her body. Let God therefore be true, and all Heretikes liars.

^ Christ calls him self many times in the gospel the son of man to declare
that as concerning the flesh, he is the son of Abraham* and of Dauid, forasmuch
as he took his ma^hode of Mary, which was of the stock and kindred of Abraha^
and Dauid* to who^ God promised, that of their sede and of the fruit of their
wo^be one should be borne in whom all nations of the earth shall be blessed. So
is it evident, that Christ is the natural son of Mary the virgin. Let God
therefore be true, and all heretikes liars.

^ Christ in many places of the holy scripture is called the son of Dauid* not
only because hee was promised unto Dauid, but because he came of his kindred,
and took flesh any blood of his stock and family even of the most vndefi^ed
virgin Mary his mother Christ therefore is true and perfect man of the blessed
virgin* and had no fantastical nor heavenly body. Let God therefore be true,
and all heretikes liars.

^ Christ was borne, wrapped in clouts, laid in a manger, sede, circumcised,
embraced in arms, grew, was made strong in spirit, profited in wisdom and age,
hungered, thirsted, eat, drank, wept, was weary, slept, rejoiced, was moved
with wrath and indignation, sorrowed, was heavy, sad, was in such an agony,
that his sweat was like drops of blood trickelyng down to the ground, feared
death, and at the last suffered the most spiteful death of the cross, and was
buried. All these are manifest tokens and evident signs of Christ's true man
hood. Neither could he have done or suffered these things* if he had a
fantastical body or a body brought from heaven. Let God therefore be true, and
all heretikes liars.

CHrist after his resurrectio^ appeared Luke. 24. unto his disciples and said
unto them peace be unto you. The disciples being abashed and afraid, and
supposing that they had scene a spirit, he said unto them, why are ye troubled,
and why doo thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my fete, that it
is eue^ I my self ha^dle me and see. For a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have.

^ Here Christ after his resurrection proves and showed him self not to bee a
fantastical but a very man, not to have an heavenly body, but a body of flesh
and bones. And to declare him self true and perfect ma^, he did eat before them
^ piece of a broiled fish and of an honey tomb. Let God therefore be true and
all heretikes liars.

PEter in a certain sermon declared Acts* 2* unto the Jaws, that Christ as
concerning the flesh came of the fruit of Dauids loins.

^ In the which words he manifestly declares his faith concerning Christ's
humanity, which is, that Christ is very ^an coming of the sede of Dauid, and
taking his manhood of the blessed virgin, which came of the stock of Da uid.
Hereof may we also learn, that the true and Christen faith is to believe, that
Iesu Christ took his flesh of Mary his mother, and brought not his body with
him from heaven, as the wicked Anabaptistes hold.

PAul in his Epistle to the Romaines Rome. 9 plainly teaches that Christ as
concerning the flesh came of the fathers of the old Testament, that is to say,
Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Dauid. andc.

In this Epistle to the Galathians he Gal. 4 saith, that whe^ the time was full
come. God sent his son, made of a woman.

^ He saith not, that he was made before of the elements in the ayre or that he
brought his b^ ^y with him from heaven, but that he was made of a woman, that
is to say, took his beginning and natural substance of Mary his mother,
concerning his humanity.

Again in his first epistle unto Timothe, 1. Tim ^ he names the man Iesus
Christ a mediator between god and man.

^ This name Mediator, proves Christ both God and man. For he that should be a
mediator between God and man, set them at one y^ were at debate, make peace
among them that before did disagree, and conjoin them to perpetual amity, which
before were enemies one to another, yea and by his own dignity, worthiness and
justice, make a love day for ever and ever, between God and man, must have in
him both the nature of God and the nature of man. Christ is that one and alone
mediator, which hath by his death ad passion set God and man together in an
everlasting peace and quietness, which before thorough sin we are at strife and
debate. As Christ therefore is true God, so is he true man, God I say, of God
the father, and man of vs, of our flesh and of our blood, or else should
blessed Paule err, which calls him a mediator* But let God be true, and all
heretikes liers.

^ Finally, in his epistle unto the Hebrews, after that he had spoken much of
the divine nature of Christ, proving Christ to be very god, he also sets forth
Christ's humanity, and pro ueth him to be true and natural man, made of our
flesh and of our blood, this alone excepted, y^ we received our nature with
sin, and in sin and by natural conjunction, Christ received his humanity of his
mother without sin, without the company of any man by the operation of the holy
ghost. But let vs hear the words of the Apostle.

For as much as the children were Hob. 2. partakers of flesh and blood, he also
him self likewise toke part with them.

^ Here as S. Paule declares evidently, that as the children, that is to say,
men be partakers of flesh and blood, so likewise Christ (because he might
destroy him that had lordship over death: that is to say, the devil by the
death in his own body) was made partaker of the same, that is, of flesh and
blood. No man doubts that our flesh is of the nature and substance of a woma^,
no more is it to be doubted that Christ toke his flesh of the nature and
substance of Mary his mother, saying the epistle saith that Christ was made per
taker of flesh and blood with vs. This could he not have ben if he had brought
his body with him from heaven, or had taken it of any other then of a natural
woman, although a pure and undefiled Virgin.

Therefore like as a man takes his nature of his parents, so likewise toke
Christ by human nature of the blessed Virgin his mother. He sai eth moreover
(He) meaning Christ, in no place takes on him the angels, but the sede of
Abraham takes he on him.

Here the Apostle manifestly confuteth the wicked opinio^ of them which teach
that Christ had a celestial body or a body made of the ayre, and plainly
affirms that he toke the sede of Abraham, that is to say: was made and became
ve rye true and natural man of the kindred of Abra ha^ according to Gods
promise. So that all that ever he had, concerning his humanity, he had it of
the blessed Virgin, which came of y^ stock of Abraham.

^ Again he saith in all things it became him to be made like unto his
bretherne. Here saint Paule confesses that Christ was made like un to vs in all
things, which thing by no means could be true, if he had not taken upon him our
nature and substance. If he belike unto vs in all things ( sin alone except) so
follows it that he is of the same nature, and of the same flesh and blood that
we are, or else could not he be like unto vs in all things. And so should this
holy apostle and al other godly writers and teachers have brought vs in error.
But let god be true and all heretikes liars.

^ Now have we learned both truly and fully of the holy scriptures, which are
infallible verities, that Christ was co^ceiued by the holy ghost and borne of
the Virgin Mary. By the which word (of) we believe that he toke his humanity of
her substance, and had none other beginning as touching his humanity than in
her and of her, by the operation of the holy ghost: so that we may truly
conclude, that as Christ is very God of God the father without a mother, so is
he very man of Mary his mother without any Father. Therefore may his God head
be as justly denied, as his manhood and flesh taking of the blessed virgin
Mary. But Christ abides very god and very man whatsoever the wicked hiretikes
hable. Cursed therefore bee Cerdo, Martian and Manes, which taught that christ
appeared as man, and yet had no part of true manhood in him, but only had a
fantastical body.

^ Cursed be Cerinthus, which taught that Iesus was begotten of Ioseph and
Mary, after y^ manner of other men, and that Christ came down from aboue unto
Iesus* Cursed bee the Ebionites, the Theodosians, the Antimonians and the
Photinians, which affirmed that Christ was borne of the virgin only man and not
God. Cursed be Appeals which taught that Christ had his body of the elements in
the ayre. Cursed be Ualentinus which said that Christ brought his body with him
from heaven, and took no flesh of the Virgin Mary: but passed through her as
water through the pipe. Cursed be his Apes the Anabaptistes* which in these our
dais have raised up that most detestable and horrible heresy. Cursed and
confounded be all they which with their hearts do not believe, and with their
mouths unfeignedly confess, that Iesus Christ is both God and man, to whom be
glory for ever.

Amen.
Against the gross and fantastical opinion of the papists, which affirm that
Christ's natural body and blood, is carnally eaten and drunken in the lords
supper.
IF the devil or the pope, or any of their imps go about with sophistical
reasons to persuade thee, that Christ is natural in the sacramental bread and
wine, or that the bread and wine is turned unto the real and natural body and
blood of Christ: even as he received it of the blessed Virgin: suffer not thy
self to bee beguiled and mocked, but valiantly resist them with these sentences
and histories of Gods most holy word.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
THe Lord is in his holy temple, the Psal* 11* Lords seat is in heaven.

The Lord lord looked down from Psal. 13 heaven upon the children of men, to
see if there were any that would vndersta^d and seek after god.

God is gone up with a merry noise, Psal. 47. and the Lord with the sound of
the trumpet.

God sits upon his holy seat. Psalm. 6^

Thou art gone upon hie (O Christ) thou hast led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men.

Sing unto God (O ye kingdoms of the earth) O sing praises unto the lord, which
sits in the heavens over all.

He looked down from his sanctuary, Psal. 10^* even out of heaven did the Lord
behold the earth, that he might hear the mournings of such as be in captivity,
and deliver the children appointed unto death.

The Lord hath prepared his seat in Psal. 103. heaue^, and his kingdom rules
over al.

O Lord my god, thou art become exceeding Psal* 104* glorious, thou art clothed
with majesty and honour, thou deck thy self with light as it were with a
garment, and spreadest out the heavens like a curtain. Thou lay the beams of
thy chambers in the waters, and make the clouds thy charets, and walk upon the
wings of the wind.

The Lord said unto my Lord, sit Psalm. 10 thou on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footestole.

The Lord is hie aboue all heathen, Psalm. 113 and his glory aboue the heavens.
Who is like unto the lord our God, that hath his dwelling so hie, and yet
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth.

Wherefore shall the heathen say, Psalm. 115 where is now their god? As for our
god he is in heaven, he hath done what so ever pleased him.

Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my eyes, Psalm. 133 which duellist in the heavens.

Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or Psalm. 129 whether shall I flee from
thy prese^ce? If I clime up into heaue^, thou art there, andc

Will god dwell on the earth. Behold ^. Reg. 8. the heavens and heavens of all
heaue^s, are not able to contain thee. And how should then this house do it,
that I have builded.

The house which I build shall be great 2. Par. ^. for great is our god aboue
al gods. But who is able to build him an house, whe^ that heaven and heaven
aboue all heavens, is not hable to receive him? Iob. 11.

God is hyer then heaven, what art thou able to do? Deper then hell, howe wilt
thou then know him? His length exceeded the length of the earth, and his
breadth the breadth of the sea.

Thus saith the Lord, heaven is my Essay. 6^ seat, and the earth is my
footestoole, where shall now the house stand that ye will build unto me? And
where shall be the place that I will dwell in?

Sentences out of the new Testament.
IF any man say unto you: Lo, here is Math. 13* Christ, or there is Christ,
believe it not. For there shall arise false anointed, and false teachers, and
shall show great miracles and wonders: in so much, that if it were possible,
the very elect should be deceived. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if
they say unto you, behold he is in the desert, go not ye forth, behold he is in
y^ secret places, believe it not. For as the lightning comes out of the east,
and appears into the West, so shall the coming of the son of man be.

Ye have the power always with you Math. 26. but me shall ye not have always.

And when the Lord had spoken unto Mat. 16. them, he was received into heaven,
and is set down on the right hand of god.

It came to pass as Christ blessed the^ Luc. 24 he departed from them, and was
carried up into heaven.

I go to prepare a place for you: And Iohn. 24. if I go to prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you even unto my self, that where I am,
there ye may be also.

If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father.

Now I go my way to him that sent Iohn. 16. me, and none of you asks me whether
I go. But because I have said such things unto you, your hearts are full of
sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you y^ truth it is expedient for you that I go
away. For if I go not away that co^forter will not come unto you. But if I
depart, I will. send him unto you.

I went out from the Father, and came into the world. Again, I leave ye world
and go to the Father.

It is Christ which dyed, ye rather Rome. 8 which is risen again: which is also
on the right hand of God.

So oft as ye shall eat of this bread, 1, Cor. 11. and drink of the cup, ye
shall xeme^ber the Lords death till he come.

God the father raised Christ fro^ the Ephe. 1. dead, and set him on his right
hand in heavenly things, aboue al rule, power, might, dominio^, and aboue all
names that are named, not in this world only but also in the world to come.

Christ is gone vpo^ high, and hath led cap Ephe. 4 tiuitie captive, and has
given gifts unto men.

That he ascended what means it, but that he also descended first into the
lowest parts of the earth.

He that descended is even the same also that ascended up* even aboue all
heavens to fulfil al things.

God hath exalted Christ on high and given Phil. ^ him a name, which is aboue
all names, that in the name of Iesus every knee should bow both in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth.

If ye be risen again with Christ, Colos. 3 seek those things which are aboue,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God.

Whenever Christ ( which is our life) shall show him self, then shall we al so
appear with him in glory.

The Lord him self shall come down 1 Thess. 4 from Heaven with a shout, and the
voice of the archangel and tromp of God. andc.

Christ the Son of God, being the Hob. 1. brightness of his fathers glory, and
the very image of his substance ruling all things with the word of his power,
hath by his own person purged our sins and sits on the right hand of the
majesty on hye.

This man Christ after hee had offered Hebr. 10. one sacrifice for sins, sits
down for ever on the right hand of God, and from hence forth tarries till his
foes be made his fotestoole.

Let vs run with patience unto the Hob. ^. battle that is set before vs,
looking un to Iesus the captain and finisher of our faith, which for the joy
that was set before him abode the cross and despised the shame, and is set down
on the right ha^d of the throne of god.

Iesus Christ is on the right hand of 1. Pet. 3. God, and is gone into heaven,
Angels, powers and might subdued unto him.

Examples out of the new Testament.
When Iesus had spoke these things, Act. ^ while the Disciples beheld him, he
was taken up on hye, and a cloud received him up out of their sight.

And while they looked up steadfastly to ward heaven, as he went, behold two
men stood by them in white apparel, which also said: ye men of Galyle, why
stand ye gasyng up to heaven? This same Iesus which is taken from you into
heaven, shall so come, even as ye have scene him go into heaven.

Stephen being full of the holy ghost, Act. 7* looked up steadfastly with his
eyes into heaven, and saw the glory of god, and Iesus standing on the right
hand of God, and said. Behold I see the heavens open, and the son of man
standing on the right hand of God.

When Saule journeyed, it fortunate Acts. 9. that as he was come ny to Damasco,
suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven, and he fell to the
earth, and heard a voice saying to him: Saule, Saule, why persecutest thou me?
And he said, what art thou Lord? and the Lord said, I am Iesus, whom thou
persecutest. andc.

Against the plucking away of thy trust and confidence from Christ and his
merits, to put it in the merits of other creatures or in thine own good works,
or in the intercession of saints, or the sacrifice of the Popish Mass.
IF Satan by this subtle and crafty suggestion seking thy da^nation, go about
to pluck thy faith, confidence, and trust from Christ his blood, and his
merits, to repose it in the merits of men, or in thine own good deeds, works
and merits, or in the intercession of saints, or in the sacrifice of the Popish
mass, so that thy whole salvation shall not hang on Christ* and his deserui^gs
only but rather on some other stran^g means: lean not to his temptations, but
manfully resist them, steadfastly abiding in this pers^asion that Christ alone
is thy righteousness and that all thy salvation depends on him alone and on
none other thing, neither in heaven nor in earth. And that thou may est be
confirmed in this faith, let these scriptures which are vn^ubted verities, ever
be before thine eyes and suffer not thy self neither by y^ crafty assaults of
satan, nor by the subtle and fleshly reasons of any man to be plucked from
them.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament
Christ is that seed, which did tread Gene. 4. down Sedans head.

Christ is that seed, in whom al nations Gene. 22. of the world shall be
blessed.

Christ is the ruler, duke and captain, Gene. 49. whom al nations have so long
looked for, which also defended his people from the power of Satan.

Christ is that Son of God whom Psalm. 2 wee are commanded to kiss and embrace,
least wee perish from the right way.

Christ is our upholder, our glory, and Psal. 3* our strong shield.

Christ is the Lord, from who^ al health and salvation comes, and hee it is ye
blesses his people.

Christ is the Lord that never forsakes Psal. 9. them that trust in him and
seek after him. Psalm. 18.

Christ is our strength, our sure rock, our bulwark, our refuge, our defence,
our buckeler, and our mighty saving health, and our sanctuary.

Christ is he that saves vs, because it is his pleasure.

Christ saves the poor oppressed, and lays full lowe the high looks of the
proud.

Christ is the Lord, in whom alone Psal. 12. our fathers trusted, they trusted,
I say in him, and he delivered them.

They cried unto him, and they were made safe, they trusted in him and they
were never confounded.

Christ is that Lord, whose ways v Psalm. 25. niuersall are mercy and truth to
them that seek after his Testament and ordinances. He it is that will be
merciful to our sins, even for his own names sake, be they never so great.

Christ is our light and our saving health Psalm. 27 who^ the^ shall we fear?
Christ is the defe^ der ^ our life, of whom then shall we ^e afraid?

Christ is the strength of his people and the defender of the health of his
anointed.

Christ is our refuge in all tribulatio^s Psalm. 32. that assail vs.

Christ's eyes are upon them that fear Psalm. 33. him, and upon them that trust
in his mercy, he may deliver their souls from death* norishe them in the time
of hunger.

Christ is gentle, blessed is that man Psal. 34. that trusts in him.

Christ beholds the righteous, and hears their prayer.

Christ is at hand for them that are troubled in hart, and he shall save the
hum ble and meke spirited.

Christ gives salvation to the right Psal. 37. os, and he is the defe^der in
the time of trouble. He helps the^ and delivers them, and makes them free from
finners, and saves them because they trust in him.

Christ pardoned all our iniquities, Psal. 103. and heals all our diseases, he
delyuereth our lives from destruction, and crowns vs in iuercye and loving
kindness.

Christ is right mild and merciful, flow unto wrath, but ready to forgenenes.
He chydeth not ever, neither is he angry always, he deals not with vs after our
sins, nor rewards vs according to our wickedness. The height of the heavens is
not so present over the earth, as is his merciable goodness over them that
worship him. He sets our sins as far from vs, as is the East fro^ the West.

Never was there any father so tender unto his children, as is the Lord unto
them that worship him. For it is he that knows our making, he remembered that
we are but of dust.

That the age of man mortal is like grass, that he flourished like a flower of
the field. Which as soon as any sharp wind touches it, it is gone being no more
found in his place. But the merciable goodness of the Lord is for ever and
ever, preserving his worshippers, and the form of his rightwise m^ king is
present with their chylders children, so long as they keep his covenant and
hold his commandments inmynd to do them.

Christ is the Lord, with whom there Psalm. 129 is both infinite mercy, and
plenteous rede^tion: For he it is that redeemed Israel from al their sins.

Christ is that Lord, yea Christ is that Essay. 43 Lord in deed which puts away
our iniquities for his own sake, and will remember them no more. Neither have
we any thing whereby we may be just fied in his sight.

Christ alone is that saviour, in whom Essay. 45 Israel is saved with an
everlasting health.

Christ can no more forget vs, then a Essay. 49. mother can forget the child of
her womb. And though she forgets her child, yet cannot he forget vs: For he
hath written up vs in his hands, so that we are always in his sight.

Christ hath taken upon him our diseases, Essay 53. and borne away our sorrows.

Christ was wounded for our iniquities, and bruised for our sins.

Christ was offered for vs, because it was his pleasure.

Christ alone hath trodden down the vynepresse, neither was there any at al
that helped him.

Examples out of the old Testament.
When God determined to slay all the Exod. 12. first borne in the land of Egipt
both of man and beast, hee commanded his people every man in his house to slay
a Lamb of a year old, and without spot, and with the blood thereof to anoint
the upper door post, and the two side posts, that when the Angel, which smote
the land of Egipt, should see the blood, he might pass over them and not
destroy them. This passel Lamb of the Jaws, is a figure of the true Pascal
lamb, Iesus Christ the Lord, which is the pure and undefiled lamb of God, which
offered him self a sweet smelling sacrifice unto God for vs, which never
committed sin, and in his mouth no gyle was found. For as the blood of the Lamb
sprinkled on the door posts of the Israelites did drive away the avenger, and
kept harmless the first begotten of the Israelites: so likewise the blood of
Christ sprinckeled in the hearts of men by ^aythe, drives Satan, sin, death,
desperation, and hell from them, puryfieth their consciences, makes their hear
tes merry, sets them at one with God, and brings ouerlastyng life as Saint Iohn
saith. Behold that lamb of god, which takes away the sin of the world.

Hereto agrees the saying of S. Paule: 1. Cor. 5 christ our passeouer is offred
up for vs.

Christ was figured by Manna which Exo. 16 God gave from heaven unto the
Israelites to eat in the desert.

For as that bread was very plesaunte, Sap. 16. and good of taste, and had in
it the savour of all sweet and dainty meates, so that they which did eat of
that, needed none other meat.

Even so likewise is Christ the most Psal. 78. sweet and pleasant bread, that
came down from heaven.

He that eats of this bread, shall live Iohn. 6. for ever, neither needs he to
follow any other strange repast. For in Christ the soul of a christen man
through faith finds enough to fed upon.

The rock, out of the which plenty of Exod. 17. sweet waters gushed out for the
co^fort of the thirsty Israelites in the wilderness, signified Christ also as
Saint Paule doth declare. For as that rock gave out abdundance of sweet and
plea sant waters to the great comfort of the peple of Israel, which otherwise
should have perished: so likewise is Christ y^ rock, out of the which flows
plenty of heavenly waters, comfortable for the thirsty soul, which otherwise
can not be succoured but must needs perish. And he that drinks of those
heavenly waters which come out of the rock Christ, shall not need to seek after
the ^inking and dirty puddles of other. For in this Christ, he shall find
plenty of waters to drink, yea and that unto the uttermost for his souls
health, as Christ him self says.

Whosoever shall drink of the water Iohn. 4. that I shall give him, shall never
more be a thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life.

The brazen serpent in the old law Number. 21. was a figure also of Christ.

For as those which were stricken of y^ fyry serpents were made whole, whe^
they looked upon the brazen Serpent for their faiths sake which they had in the
promise of god annexed unto the ser pent: so likewise they that are wounded
with the fiery darts of Satan, are made whole, when so ever they behold with
the eyes of the inward man by faith. Iesus Christ which was crucified for our
sin, as Christ himself testifies, saying: As Moises lifted up the Serpent in
the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: that none that
believes in him peryshe, but have ever ^astyng life.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Christ is so called a Saviour, for hee Math. 9. it is that saves his people
from their sins.

Christ came not to call the justiciaries Math. 11. but sinners to repentance.

Christ calls al them that labour and Math. 11. are laden, and he promises that
he will refresh them.

Christ is that true light, which light Iohn. ^ neth every man that comes into
this world.

Christ is our Lord of whose fulness al Iohn. 1. we have received, even grace
for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Iesus
Christ

Christ is that lamb of god, which takes away the sins of the world:

As Moses lifted up the Serpent in Iohn. 3. wilderness, so must the Son of man
be lifted up, that every on that believes in him, may not perish but have
everlasting life. For God loves the world so fervently that he gave his only
begot ten son that every one that believes in him may not perish, but have
everlasting life.

For god sent not his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world should be saved by him. He that believes in the son, hath everlasting
life, but he that believes not in the son, shall not se life, but the wrath of
God abides upon him.

Christ gives that living water, Iohn. 4. whereof whosoever drinks, shall
neuermore thirst, but that water shall be unto him a fountain of water that
springs up into eternal life.

Christ is that bread of life, which came Iohn. 6. down from heaven. If any man
eat of that bread, he shall live for ever.

Christ alone the Son of God makes Iob. 8. vs free.

Christ is the door. If any man enter Iohn. 10. in by him, he shall be safe.

For he shall go in and come out and ^nde pasture.

Christ is that good shepherd which gave his life for his sheep. Iohn. 11.

Christ is the resurrection and life, he that believes in him although he were
dead, shall live and every one that lives and believes in him shall never dye.

Christ is the light of the world, and Iohn. 12. came into the world for this
purpose y^ every one that believes in him should not abide in darkness.

Christ is the way, truth and life. Iohn. 14. No man comes unto the Father but
by him. Iohn. 15.

Christ is that mighty prince which hath overcome the world. Act. 4.

There is none other name given unto men under heaven where in they must be
saved, but only that name of Christ. Neither is there any salvation in any
other, but in him alone. Acts. 10.

Christ is ordained of God a judge of quick and dead. To him give all the pro
phets witness, that thorough his name all that believe in him, shall receive
remis zion of sins.

Thorough Christ, is preached unto vs the forgiveness of sins, so that by him
Act. 13. all y^ believe, are justified from all things from which we could not
be justified by the law of Moyses.

The righteousness no doubt, which Rome 3. is good before God, comes by ye
faith of Iesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe. There is no
difference, for all have sinned, and want the glory of God, but are justified
freely by his grace thorough the redemption that is in Christ Iesu, to whom God
hath made a ^eat of mercy thorough faith in his blud, to show the
righteousness, which before him is of valour.

Christ died for our sins, and rose ^ Rome. 4. gain for our justification.

We being justified by faith, are at Rome. 5. peace with god thorough our Lord
Iesus Christ, by whom we have away in thorough faith unto this grace, wherein
we stand and rejoice in hope of the praise that shall be given of God.

God sets out his love that he hath to vs, forasmuch as while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for vs. Much more then now (being justified in his blood)
shall wee be saved from wrath thorough him. For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his son: much more saying we are re conciled,
we shall be preserved by his life. Not only so, but we also joy in God by our
Lord Iesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement.

^ Rede the whole Chapter.

Everlasting life is the gift of God Rome. ^ thorough Iesus Christ our Lord.

There is no dampnation to them which Rome. 8 are in Christ Iesus, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the spirit that
brings life thorough Iesus Christ, hath made vs fre fro^ the law of sin and
death.

We know that al things work for the best unto them that love god, which also
are called of purpose. For those which he knew before, he also ordained before,
that they should be a like fashioned to the shape of his son that he might bee
the first begotten son among many brethren. And whom he appointed before, them
also he called. And which he called, them also he justified, which he
justified, them also he glorified.

What shall we the^ say to these things? If God be on our side, who can be
against vs, which spared not his own son, but gave him for vs all, how shall he
not with him give vs all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, who then shall co^demne? It is Christ
which is dead, yea, rather which is risen again, which is also on the right
hand of God, and makes intercession for vs.

Christ is the end of the law to justify Rome. 10. all that believe. Whosoever
believes on Christ, shall not be ashamed. There is no difference between ye
Iewe and the Gentile. For one is Lord over all that cal on him, for whosoever
shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be safe.

Christ is made of God our wisdom, 1, Cor. 1. our righteousness, our
sanctification, and redemption

Christ our Easter Lamb is offered up 1. Cor. 5 for vs.

We are washed, we are sanctified, yea, 1. Cor. 6 we are justified by the name
of the Lord Iesu, and by the spirit of our God.

The liberality of our lord Iesus Christ 2. Cor. 8. is great, which though he
were rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might
be made rich.

If righteousness come of the law, then Gal. 2. died Christ in vain.

Christ hath delivered vs fro^ ye curse of Gal. 3. the law, and was made
accursed for vs.

S^ande fast in the liberty wherewith Gala. 5. Christ hath made vs free, and
wrap not your selves again in the yoke of bondage.

Ye are gone quite fro^ Christ as many as are justified by the law, and are
fallen from grace. For we look in spirit to be justified thorough faith. For in
Iesu Christ neither is circumcision any thing worth, neither vncircumcision,
but faith which by love is mighty in operation.

God forbid y^ I should rejoice in any thing, but only in y^ cross, death and
passio^, of our Lord Iesus Christ.

Blessed be god the father of our Lord Iesu Christ, which hath blessed vs with
all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly things by Christ.

By christ we have redemption thorough Ephe. 1 his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins according to the retches of his grace which he shed on vs abundantly in
all wisdom and prudence.

God which is rich in mercy thorough Ephe. 2 his great love, wherewith he loved
vs even when we were dead in sin, hath quic kened vs to gether in Christ (for
by grace are ye saved) and hath raised vs up together, and made vs sit together
in heavenly things thorough Christ Iesus.

By grace are ye made safe thorough faith and that not of your selves. For it
is the gift of God, and comes not of works, least any man should boast himself.

We were strangers and far of, but now we are made nigh by thy blood of Christ.

Christ is our peace.

By Christ Iesu our Lord are we bound Ephe. 3 to draw nigh in the trust which
we have by faith on him.

Christ is ascended up on high and hath Ephe. 4 led captivity captive, and hath
geue^ gifts unto men.

In Christ have we redemption thorough Col. 1. his blood, that is to say,
forgiveness of sins.

By Christ thorough the blood of hyscrosse are all things reconciled to God the
father and set at peace both in heaven and in earth.

This is a true saying and by all means Tim. 1 worthy to be received, that
Christ Iesus came into this world to save sinners.

There is one God, and one Mediator 2. Tim. 2 between God and man, which is the
man Christ Iesus which gave himself a ransom for all men.

God hath not saved vs for the deeds of Titus. 3. rightousnes which we have
wrought, but of his mercy hath he saved vs.

We are not redeemed with corruptible 1. Pet. 1. silver and gold, from our vain
conuer sation, which we received by the tradicions of the fathers, but by the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot.

Christ is the shepherd and bishop of 1. Pet. 2. our souls

The blood of Iesus Christ Gods so^ne, Ihon. 1. makes vs clean from all sin.

If any ma^ sin, we have an advocate Iohn. 2. with the father, Iesus Christ
that righteous one, and he is a mercy stock for our sins: not for our sins
only, but also for the sins of all the world.

Our sins are forgiven vs in ye name of Christ.

For this purpose appeared the son Iohn. 3. of God to loose the works of the
devil.

In this appears the love of God towards ohn. 4. vs, because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live thorough him. Herein is
love, not that we love God, but that he loved vs, and sent his son to be a
sacrifice for our sins.

Christ in his own person hath purged Hebr. 1. our sins.

Christ thorough death put down him that Hob. 2. had rule over death, that is
to say, the devil, and hath made vs free from the danger of bondage. In that
Christ himself suffered and was tempted, he is able to succour them that are
tempted.

We have not an high priest which can Hob* 5 not have compassion on our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, but yet without sin.
Let vs therefore go boldly unto the seat of grace, that we may receive mercy
and find grace to help in time of need.

Christ hath an everlasting priesthood. Hob. 7. Wherefore he is able also ever
to save them that come unto God by him, forasmuch as he ever lives to make
intercession for vs.

Christ being Bishop of good things Hebr. 1^ to come, came by a greater and a
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this
manner building, neither by the blood of Goats, and Calves, but by his own
blood he entered in, once for all into the holy place, and found eternal
redemption. For if the blood of Oxen and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer,
when it was sprinkled, purified the unclean, as touching the purifying of the
flesh: howe much more shall the blood of Christ which thorough the eternal
spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead
works to serve the living god.

And for this cause is he the mediator tour of the new Testament, that thorough
death which chanced for the rede^tion of these transgressions that were in the
first Testament, they which were called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance.

Christ now in the end of the world hath appeared once for al, to put sin to
flight by the offering up of him self.

We are sanctified by the offering of ^eb. 10. the body of Iesu Christ once for
all. With one offering hath Christ made perfect for ever them that are
sanctified.

Christ loved vs and washed vs from pose. 1. our sins in his own blood, and
made vs kings and priests unto god his father.

Christ lives for evermore, and hath the keys of hell and death.

Christ is Lord of Lords and king of pose. 17. kings, and they that are on his
side, are cal led and chosen, and faithful.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
Christ is that well-beloved Son of ^ath. 3. god, for whose sake the heavenly
father is well pleased with man.

Christ is that king which forgave the Mat. 18. servant the ten thousand
talents that be ought.

Christ is that most loving Samaritan, Luke. 10. which healed the wounded man
that was half dead.

Christ is that tender shepherd which Luke. 15. fetched home unto the
shepefolde even upon his shoulders the lost sheep.

Christ is that most gentle father which with so great joy and with embracing
arms received home again the lost son.

Against such as go about to dissuade the christen people from the studying,
reading, or hearing of gods word.
IF Satan or any of his imps go about to dissuade thee, and to pluck thy mind
from studying, reading or hearing gods word, that thou may walk in darkness,
and never come to the knowledge of the truth, least by this means thou
shouldest be saved: lean not unto him, but enarm thy self against his wicked
te^ptations with these scriptures following.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
THou shalt tell thy son at the same Exod. 13. dai, and say: because of that
which the lord did for me, whe^ I departed out of Egipt. Therefore shall it bee
a sign unto thee in thine hand, and a token of remembrance before thine eyes,
that the law of the lord may be in thy mouth, how that the Lord brought thee
out of Egipt with a mighty hand.

Speak to the children of Israel, and say unto them, that they make the^ guards
upon the quarters of their garments amongst all your posterities, and put
yellow r^handes upon the guards in ye quarters. And the guards shall serve you
that ye may look upon them and remember all the commandments of the lord, and
do them, y^ ye order not your selves after the meaning if your own heart, nor
go a whoryng after your own eyes. Therefore shall ye reme^ber, and do all my
co^maun dements, and be holy unto your God.

Take heed to thy self now, and keep Deuteronomy. 2 well thy soul, that thou
forget not the things which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not out
of thy heart all the days of thy life. And thou shalt teach them thy children,
and thy childers children.

Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is Deuteronomy. 6 one Lord only. And thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with al thy soul, and with all
thy might. And these words which I command thee this day shalt thou take to
heart, and shalt rehearse them unto thy children, and shalt talk of them, when
thou sit in thine house, and whe^ thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and
when thou rysest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and
they shall bee a token of remembrance before thine eyes, and thou shalt write
them upon the posts of thine house, and upon the gates.

If ye harken unto my commaundeme^ts Deuteronomy. 1^ which I command you this
day, that ye love the Lord your God, and serve him with all your hart, and with
all your soul, then will I give rain unto your land in due season, early and
late, that thou may gather in thy corn, thy wine, and thine oil, and I will
give grass upon thy field for thy cattle, that ye may eat and be filled. But
beware that your heart bee not deceived, that ye go aside, and serve other
gods, and worship them, and then the wrath of the Lord wax what upon you and he
shut up the heaven, that there come no rain, and the earth give not her
increase, and ye perish shortly from the good land which the lord hath given
you.

Put up therefore these my words in your hearts and in your souls, and bind
them for a sign upon your hands, that they bee a token of remembrance before
your eyes, and teach them your childre^, so that thou talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, or walk by the way, when thou least down and when thou
resist up, and write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon the gates,
that thou and thy children may live long in ye land which the Lord swear unto
thy fathers to give them as long as the days of heaven endure upon earth.

Let my doctrine increase as rain, and Deuteronomy. 32. my speech flow as doth
the dew. Even as the rain upon the grass, and the drops upon the herb.

Take to heart all the words which I testify unto you this day that ye co^mau^d
your children to observe and do all these words of this law. For it is no vain
word to you, but it is your life, and this word shall prolong your life.

Be strong and very bold, that thou Iosua, 1. may keep and doe every thing
according to the law that Moses my servant commanded thee.

Turn not aside from it, neither to the right hand nor to the left, that thou
majesty deal wisely whether soever thou goosed And let not the book of this law
depart out of thy mouth, but exercise thy self therein day and night that thou
may keep and doe every thing according to it that is written therein.

Then shalt thou prosper in thy ways and deal wisely. Lo I have commanded thee
to be strong and bold. Fear not and be not afraid, for the Lord thy God is with
thee, wheresoever thou goosed.

Blessed is the man that deliteth in the Psal. 1. law of the Lord, and
exercises himself in his law both day and night.

Lay hand on the learning lest the Lord Psal. 2. be angry, and so ye perish
fro^ the right way.

The law of the Lord is pure, it turns Psal. 18. souls. The witness of the Lord
is faith full it gives wisdom even unto babes.

The statutes of the Lord are right they rejoice the hart, the commandment of
the Lord is bright, and lighteneth the eyes

The fear of the Lord is holy, it endures for ever, the judgements of the Lord
are true and righteous altogether, they are more pleasant and worthy, more to
be desired then gold and precious stone, yea they be sweter then the honey and
the honey comb.

The Lord shall tell in the Scriptures Psal. 85. of the people and of those
Princes that were in her.

Blessed is the man whom thou hast nur Psalm. 113 tered, O lord, and taught him
thy law.

He hath sent his word and healed them and Psal. 117. delivered them from their
destructions.

Blessed are they ye search his testimonies Psal. 117. and seek after him with
their whole heart.

Thou hast given strait charge that thy commandments should be kept.

Oh that my ways were stablished to keep thy statutes, then should not I be co^
founded while I have respect unto all thy commandments.

Where with all, shall a young man clenfe his way? Verily by ruling himself
according to thy word. With my whole hart have I sought thee, oh let me not go
wrong out of thy commandments.

Thy words have I hid within my hart that I should not sin against thee.

Thou rebukest ye proud, cursed are they that depart from thy commandments.

In thy testimonies is my delete, yea thy statutes are my counsellors.

Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.

Oh give me understanding and I shall keep thy law, yea I shall keep it with my
whole heart.

Lead me in the path of thy commandments, for that is my desire: Incline my
hart unto thy testimonies, and not un to covetousness.

The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver.

The wicked me^ have told me tales but nothing agreeable to thy law. For all
thy commandments are true, yet have the ungodly persecuted me.

If my delete were not in thy law, I should perish in my trouble.

Oh how sweet are thy words unto my throat, yea more then honey is unto my
mouth. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

It is hie time for thee O Lord to lay to thine hand. For they have destroyed
thy law. For I love thy commandments aboue gold and precious stone.

The preaching of the word gives sight, yea and brings forth understanding even
unto the very babes.

Helthe is far from the ungodly, for they regard not thy statutes.

But great is the peace that they have which love thy law, and they are not
offended at it.

My Son, if thou wilt receive my Prou. 2. words, and keep my commandments by
thee, that thine ear may harken unto wisdom, apply thine hart then to under
standing. For if thou cry after wisdom and call for knowledge: if thou seek
after her as after money, and diggest for her as for treasure, then shalt thou
understand the fear of the lord, and find the knowledge of God.

For it is the Lord that geeueth wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. He preserves the welfare of the righteous, and de^e^deth them
that walk innose^tly, he kepeth the^ in the right path, and preserves the way
of the saints? Then shalt thou not under stand rightuousnesse, judgment and
equi tie, yea and every good path. If wisdom enter into thine heart, and thy
soul delete in knowledge, then shall council preserve thee, and understanding
shall keep thee.

That thou majesty be delivered fro^ the evil way, and from the man that speaks
froward things, from such as leave the high street and walk in the way of
darkness, which rejoice in doing evil, and delete in wicked things, whose ways
are crooked, and their paths slanderous. That thou majesty be deleted also from
the strange woman, and fro^ her that is not thine own, which gives sweet words,
forsakes the husband of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God. For her
house is inclined unto death, and her paths unto Hell. All they that go in unto
her come not again, neither take they hold of the way of life. That thou walk
in the good way, and keep y^ paths of the righteous. For the just shall dwell
in the land, and the innocents shall remain in it, but the ungodly shall be
rooted out of the land, and the wicked doers shall be taken out of it.

Blessed is the man that finds wisdom Pro. 3 and obtains understanding, for ye
getting of it is better then any m^rchandise of silver, and the profit of it is
better then gold. Wisdom is more worth then precious stones, and all the things
that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Upon her right hand is
long life, and upon her left hand is riches and honour. Her ways are pleasant
ways, and al her paths are peaceable. She is a tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her, and blessed are they that keep her fast.

My son let not these things depart fro^ thine eyes, but keep my law and
counsel so shall it be life unto thy soul and grace unto thy mouth.

Then shalt thou walk safely in thy way, and thy foot shall not stumble. If
thou slepest, thou shalt not be afraid, but shalt take thy rest and sleep
sweetly. Thou shalt not need to be afraid of any soden fear, neither for the
violent rushing in of the ungodly whe^ it comes.

For the lord shall be beside thee, and keep thy foot that thou be not taken.

Let thine heart receive my words, keep Pro. 4 my commandments, and thou shalt^
live.

Get the^ wisdom, get thee understanding, forget not the words of my mouth, and
shrink not from the^. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love her,
and she shall keep thee. The chief point of wisdom is, that thou willingly to
obtain wisdom, and before all thy goods to get understanding. Make much of her
and she shall promote thee, yea if thou embracest her, she shall bring thee
unto honour.

She shall make thee a gracious head and garnish thee with the crown of glory.
Hear my son, and receive my words, that the years of thy life may be many: I
will show the way of wisdom and lead thee in the right paths. So that if thou
goosed therein, there shall no straightness hinder thee: and when thou run thou
shalt not fall. Take fast hold of doctrine, let her not go, keep her, for she
is thy life.

The commandment is a lantern, Pro. 6. and the law is a light and the way of
life.

Where no knowledge of gods word is, Pro. 19 the soul is not well,

Apply thy heart unto learning, and Pro. 2^ thine ear to the words of
knowledge.

Hee that turns away his ear from Pro. 28 hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abhorred.

When the preaching of Gods word ^* 29 fails, then perishes the people.

Every word of GOD is pure and Pro. 30 clean, yea it is a shield to them that
trust in it.

Vain are all those men, in whom no Sap. 13 knowledge of god is.

Neither herb nor emplasture has Sap. 16. healed the^, but thy word O Lord,
which heals all things.

The fountain of wisdom is the Eccle. 1 the word of god.

Be make and lowly to hear the word Eccle. 5 of god, that thou may understand,
and bring forth a wise and true answer.

Have all thy pleasure in the commaun Eccle. 7 dements of god, and in his laws
be thou most of al occupied, and he shall give thee an hart, and a desire of
wisdom shall be ge uen thee.

Be not slack to believe the word of Eccle. 16 God.

Learnig is a precious jewel to a wisema^. Eccle. 21

Nothing is better then the fear of god, and nothing is sweter then to have a
respect Eccle. 23 to the commandments of the Lord

My people is led captive because they Essay. 5. have no knowledge.

They have caste away the law of the Lord of hostess, and the word of the holy
one of Israel have they blasphemed.

Therefore is the wrath of the lord who^ against his people, and he will
stretch out his hand, and destroy them.

Make hast unto the law and witness. Essay. 8. If they speak not according to
this word they shall not have the morning light.

All ye that are a thirst; come unto the waters, and ye that have no money,
make Essay. 55 haste, by and eat. Come I say, by without money and without any
^xchaunge, wine and milk. Why lay ye out your money for that that is not bread
in deed, and spend your labour about that that shall never satisfy you? Hear
me, hear I say, and eat that which is good, that ye may be well liking. Give
ear and come unto me, hear me I say, and your soul shall live.

As rain and snow comes down ^rom heaven and returns not th^ther again, but
watered the earth and makes it to bud, and bring forth the fruit, so that it
gives sede to the sower, and bread to the eater: so shall my word be that shall
come out of my mouth.

It shall not return unto me boyd, but shall do what soever I will, and prosper
in them, to whom I send it.

Let not the wise man rejoice in his Iere. 9 wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor yet let the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that
rejoices, rejoice in this thing that he know me, that I am ye Lord which doth
mercy, iudgeme^t and righteousness in the earth.

Withdraw not the word from the Iere. 26 people, if peradventure they hear and
turn from their wicked way, so that it may repent me of the evil which I have
determi ned to do unto them for the maliciousnes of their councels.

Hear Israel the commandments Baruc. 3. of life, give ear that thou majesty
become wise. Howe chanced it O Israel, that thou art in the land of thine
enemies? Thou art worn out in a strange land, thou art defiled with the dead.
Thou art^ reputed with them that go down to Hell. Thou hast forsaken the
fountain of wisdom. For if thou hottest walked in the way of god, undoubtedly
thou hottest dwelt in rest upon the earth: Learn therefore where wisdom is, and
understanding is, that thou majesty also know where continuance of life is, and
all things necessary for to maintain the same, again where the light of the
eyes and peace is. Bar^c. ^

This is the book of the commandments, and the law which abides for ever. All
that keep it, shall come unto life, but they that forsake it, shall come unto
death. Amos. 8

Behold, the day is come, saith y^ Lord that I will caste an hunger upon the
earth, not the hunger of bread, nor the thirst of water, but of bearing the
word of the Lord. And they shall go from sea to sea, and walk about from the
South to the East, sicking the word of the Lord, and yet shall they not find
it.

^ Examples out of the ^ Testament.
GOd the Father wrote the law of the Exod. 2 ten co^maundements in tables of
stone with his finger, and commanded Moyses to declare them unto the people.

The people are commanded of God, ^eut. 4 not only to rede his holy law, but
also diligently to exercise them selves in the me ditation thereof so long as
they live, and to teach it their childre^, yea to talk of it, both in their
house, and when they go abroad, and to write it upon t^e thresholds, doors and
posts of their houses, that it may bee ^er in their sight. For man shall not
live with bread alone, but with every word that proceeded from the mouth of
God.

A king is commanded to read the ^eut. 17 book of the law of the Lord all the
days of his life, that he may fear the Lord his God.

Iosua was commanded that the book ^sua. 1 of the Lords law should not depart
from his mouth, but that he should study in it day and night, that he might
keep and do all things that are written in that book.

King Saul was cast down from his roy ^g. 15 all estate, because he was
negligent and disobedient to the law of God.

When Dauid lay on his death bed, Pa. 29 he said to Solomon: thou shalt prosper
and come to great rename, if thou kepest the commandments and ordinances, which
the Lord commanded Moses.

Ioas, when he was crowned in y^ temple, 2. Par. 23. had the law of the Lord
delivered unto his hands, that he should keep and maintain the same.

Iosaphat that walked in the commandments 2. Par. 27 of the Lord and loved Gods
word so entirely, that he sent his princes, Leuites, and priests to teach in
all parts of Iuda, which had the book of the Lords law with them, and went
about in all the cities of Iuda, and taught the people.

Ezechias diligently walked in the law 2. Par. 29. of the Lord, purged his
realm of all idolatry, set up again the true worshipping of God, and exhorted
all his subjects to follow the law of their Lord God.

Iossas that most godly king which walked 2. Par. 34. so purely in the ways of
the lord, that he declined neither on the right hand nor on the left, when the
book of the law was delivered unto him, did not only cause the book to be red
before him, but he himself also red it before all his people, both small and
great, and (all idolatry destroyed) restored the true religion to his kingdom.

Esdras red the law of the Lord plainly ^. Esd. 8. and distinctly to the
people, and they gave very earnest and diligent attendance to the bearing of
it.

Susan from her infanci^, was so diligently Dan. 13 brought up of her parents
in the law of God, that she did not only fear god, but also chose rather to be
stoned un to death, then she would once transgress the law of god by committing
adultery.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Man shall not live with bread alone, Math. 4 but with every word that comes
out of the mouth of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this age Math. 24. shall not pass, till all
these things be done. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not
pass away.

Blessed are they that hear the word Luke. 11. of god and keep it.

Blessed is he that eats bread in the Luke. 13. kingdom of God.

They have Moyses and the Prophets, Luc. 16. let them hear them. If they hear
not Moyses and the Prophets, neither will they believe though one should rise
from the dead.

This is condemnation, that light is Iohn. ^* come into the world, and that men
loved darkness more then light, because their works were evil. For every man
that doth evil, hates the light, neither comes he to y^ light, least his works
should be reproved, but he that doth truth, comes to light that his deeds might
bee known how they are wrought in god.

Search the scriptures for ye think to Iohn. 5. have eternal life in them, and
these are they which testify of me, neither will ye come unto me that ye may
have life.

The words that I speak to you, are Iohn. 6. spirit and life. Lord to whom
shall we go? Thou hast the words of everlasting life.

He that is of god hears the words of Iohn. 8. god. But ye hear not because ye
are not of god. If a man kepeth my word, he shall never see death.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know Iohn. 10. them, and they follow me, and I
give them everlasting life.

Walk while ye have light, least darkness overwhelm you. He that walk in Iohn.
12. darkness, knows not whether he goes. While ye have light believe in the
light: that ye may be the children of light.

He that hath my precepts and keeps Ioh. 14. them, he it is that loves me. If
any man loves me, he will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we
shall come to him, and dwell with him.

This is everlasting life, even to know Ioh. 17. thee the alone true God, and
whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ.

Every one that is of the truth, hears Iohn. 18. my voice.

The gospel of Christ is the power of Rome. 1. god unto salvation, for so many
as believe.

Except the Lord of bostes had left unto Rome. 9. vs sede, that is, his most
blessed word, we had been as Sodom, and might well have been likened to
Gomorra.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing Rome. 10 by the word of God.

Whatsoever things are written before Rome. 15. time, are writte^ for our
learning, that we thorough patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

The word of the cross, is to them that ^. Cor. 1 perish, folishnesse, but to
vs* that obtain salvation, it is the power of God.

If the gospel of Christ be yet bid, it is ^. Cor. 4. bid among them that are
lost, in whom y^ god of this world hath blinded y^ minds of them which believe
not, least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is the image of
God, should not shyne unto the^. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly
with all wisdom. Teach and monish one an other.

Quench not the spirit. Despise not the studies and preachinges of the holy
Scripture. Prove all things, and that is good, hold fast.

God will all men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth. 1.
Tim. ^*

Give thy mind to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, continue in these things.
1. Tim. 4

Continue in reading the holy scripture, which is able to make thee wise unto
saluatio^, 2. Tim. 3 thorough the faith which is in Christ Iesus: For all
Scripture geue^ by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to improve, to
amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of god may be perfect and
prepared to all good works.

The word of God is liuishe and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword.

Lay a part all filthiness, all superfluity Hob. 4. of maliciousnesse, and
receive with meke^es, y^ word that is grafted in you, which is able to save
your souls. And see ye be doers of the word, and not hearers only, disceauinge
your selves. For if any hear the word and doe it not, he is like to a man that
beholds his bodily face in a glass: For as soon as he hath looked on him self
hee goes his way, and forgets forthwith what his fashion was. But who so looks
in the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein (if he bee not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work) the same shall be happy in his dede.

Lay a side all malice, and guile, and dissimulation ^. Pet. 2. and envy, and
al backbiting, and as new borne babes desire that milk not of the body, but of
the mind, which is without corruption, that ye may grow therein.

We have a right sure word of prophecy: ^. Pet. 1. whereunto if ye take heed as
unto a light that shines in a dark place, ye doe well until the day dawn, and
the day star arise in our hearts. So that ye first know this, that no prophecy
in the scripture hath any private interpretation. For the scripture came never
by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy
ghost.

Whosoever transgresses and abides 2. Iohn. 1. not in the doctrine of Christ,
hath not god. He that endures in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the father
and the son.

If there come any to you, and bring not this learning, him receive not to
house, neither once bid him god speed, for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds.

Blessed is he that reads and hears Apoc. 1. the words of the prophecte, and
keeps these things that are written therein.

Blessed is he that kepeth the words of Apoc. 22. the prophecy of this book.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
THe people preased so greatly upon Luck. 6. Christ to hear the word of God,
that he was compelled to enter into a ship, and so to teach them.

Mary the sister of Martha, sat at Iesus Luck. 10. feet and heard his
preaching. And when Martha being greatly encumbered about much serving and
other worldly business, said to Christ: Moister, doest thou not care that my
sister hath lest me to minister alone. Bid her therefore that she help me. He
said: Martha, Martha, thou care and art troubled, about many things, but one
thing is needful. Mary hath chose^ her that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her.

When Christ preached in the temple, Luck. 19. all the people did hang of his
mouth, hearing him.

Peter turned three thousand at one of Act. 2. his sermons.

The Eunuch chamberlain, and of great Act. 7. authority with Candace, Queen of
the Ethiopians, read the Prophet Esaye, sitting in his charet, to whom the holy
ghost sent Philip, which did both expound the Scriptures unto him, and also
baptised him. So dere are they to God which delight in the reading of his holy
word.

The noblest of birth among them of ^ Acts. 17. Thessalonia, which received the
word with all diligence of minds, searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were even so as Paule and Silos preached.

Apollos was an eloquent man and mighty Act. 18. in the scriptures, He was
informed in the way of the lord, and he spake fervently in the spirit, and
taught diligently the things of the Lord, and yet knew he but the baptism and
doctrine of Iohn only, whom whe^ Aquila and Priscilla his wife being lay
persons, had herd, they toke him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of
God more perfectly, in so much that afterword he mightily overcame the Jaws and
that openly, showing by the scriptures that Iesus was Christ.

Philip the Euaungelist and preacher of the gospel, had four daughters
excellently Act. 21. learned in the holy scriptures.

Timothe was brought up in the holy 2. Tim. 3 scriptures from his young age.

Against strange religion or new found worshipping of God.
IF thou be moved unto strange religion or new found worshipping of God, either
by Satan, by the pope, or by any subtue hipocrite, loke that thou by no means
doest lean unto their wicked motions, but rather valiantly withsta^d the^, with
these sentences and examples of the holy scripture.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament
Hear Israel, your Lord God is one God. Thou shalt love thy Lord god
Deuteronomy. 1^ with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength. Thou shalt fear thy Lord God, and serve him alone.

And now Israel, what doth the Lord Deuteronomy. 6 thy God require of thee, but
that thou fairest the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, and love him, and
serve the Lord thy Godwith all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and keep the
commandments of the Lord.

Doe that which is pleasant in y^ sight Deuteronomy. 13 of the Lord thy God.
Sacrifice to the Lord the sacrifice of righteousness, and trust in him.

I will not reprove thee in thy sacrifices, Psal. 5. says the^ Lord, for I am
full of thy burnt offerings. Offer to God the sacrifice of praise, and pay to
the most highest thy vows. Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shalt honour me.

Hear O my people, I will give thee Psalm. 81. a charge O Israel: If thou wilt
hear me, there shall be no strange nor new found God in thee, neither shalt
thou worship any foreign God. For I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out
of the land of Egipt. To doe mercy and judgment pleases the Lord more than
sacrifice.

A sacrifice well pleasing to the Lord isto attend to his co^maundementes, and
to depart from all iniquities and unrighteousness.

What shall I do with all these your sacrifices, Essay. 1. saith the Lord: I am
full of them. The burnt offerings of Weathers and fatlynges, the blood of
Calves, Lambs, and Goats, I will none of them. When ye come before my sight,
who required these things at your hands, that ye should walk in my courts?
Bring me no more sacrifice on this manner in vain: Your sensing is abomination
unto me. The feasts of the new Moon, and the Sabbothes, and other holy days I
can not abide. Your congregations are wicked: Your Kalendes and your solemn
feasts, my soul hates. I am even weary of them. It grieves me to the hart for
to suffer them. When ye shall pray many prayers: I will not hear you. For your
hands are full of blood. Bee ye washed and clean. Take away your evil thoughts
from mine eyes. Cease to do evil, learn to doe well. Seek judgment, help the
poor oppressed: be favourable to the fatherless, defend y^ widow, and then come
and prove me, saith the lord. If your sins bee as red as scarlet, yet shall
they be made as white as snow. And if they be made like purpell, yet shall they
be made as white as wolle. If that ye will be contented and hear me, ye shall
eat the good fruits of y^ earth. If that ye will not, but provoke me to anger,
the sword shall devour you, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

Put your burnt offerings to your sacrifices and eat the flesh. For when I
brought your Fathers out of the land of Egypt, I spake not one word unto them
of burnt offerings and sacrifices, but this I commanded them, saying: hear my
voice, and I shall be your God, and ye shall be my people. See ye walk in all
the ways that I have commanded you, that ye may prosper.

I hate and utterly defy your holy days, and where as ye sense me when ye come
together, I will not accept it. And though ye offer me burnt offerings, yet
will not I receive your gifts. Away from me with the noise of thy songs, for I
can not abide the hearing of thy playing at the Organs. Provide that equity may
follow as the water, and righteousness as a mighty stream, for in these things
have I delight and pleasure says the Lord.

I will mercy and no sacrifice, saith the Ose. 6. Lord, and the knowledge of
God do I set more by, then burnt offerings.

What shall I offer worthy the Lord? Mesh. 6. Shall I bow my knee to y^ hie
god? Shall I offer unto him burnt sacrifices and calves of a year old? May the
Lord be pleased with a thousand fat Weathers? Or with many thousands of lusty
Goats? Shall I give my first begotten for my wickedness? Even the fruit of my
womb for the sin of my soul? I will show the^ ( Omen) what is good, and what
the Lord requires of thee: verily to do judgment, to love mercy, and carefully
to walk with thy God.

How long will ye halt on both parts. 3. Reg. 18. If the Lord be God, follow
him. If Baall be God, follow him.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
NAdab and Abihu of a good intent offered incense to the Lord with strange
Leuit. 10* fire, yet for all their good zeal, they were consumed with fire, so
that they dyed before the Lord.

King Saule thought that he had done 1. Reg. 13. great worship unto God, when
in the absence of Samuel he offered burnt offerings, but Samuel said unto him:
thou hast done folishly, neither hast kept the co^maundements of the Lord thy
God, which I commanded thee.

Saule also of a good zeal contrary 2. Reg. 15. to the commandment of God,
spared Agog the king of Ameleche alive, with the best and fattest flocks of
sheep, oxen, ^c: Pretending, that he reserved them for to offer unto the Lord.
But Samuel said unto him: for as much as thou hast caste away the word of the
Lord, the Lord hath cast away thee: that thou be no more king. Wills the Lord
burnt offerings and sacrifices, and not rather that it may be obeyed unto his
word? Obedience is better then sacrifices: and to give ear to the lords
commandment, is more then to offer the fat of Weathers.

Oz thought y^ he had done God high ^. Reg. 6. service, when he stayed the Arc
of God in the wane, being in jeopardy of falling: but yet was y^ Lord angry
with him, because he touched it contrary to his word, in so much that he was
stricken and suddenly dyed.

King Ozias toke upon him to burn incense 2. Par. 26. unto the Lord, thinking
that by this means he should highly please God, but for all his pretensed
holiness he was strike^ with leprosy: and so being cast out of the house of the
Lord, he continued a leper even unto his death.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
THese people draw nigh unto me with Math. 15 their mouths, and honour me with
their lips, but their hearts are far from me. Behold, they worship me in vain,
teaching doctrines, even the co^maundements of men.

Woe be unto you ye Scribes and Pharisees, Ma. 23. yea very ipocrites: which
devour widows houses under the pretence of long prayer, ye shall therefore
receive the more grievous dampnation.

God hath delivered vs from the hand of Luck. 1. our enemies, that we should
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

The hour comes and now it is, whe^ Iohn. 4. true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and truth, for the father seeks such, that should worship him.

God is a spirit, and they y^ worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth.

The time shall come, that whosoever kills you, shall think that they do unto
Ioh. 16. God an hie good service.

God is my witness whom I serve in Rome. 1* my spirit.

Be ye fulfilled with the spirit, speaking Ephe. 5 with your selves in psalms
and hymns and spiritual songs, and making melody to the Lord in your hearts,
giving thanks always for all things unto God in the name of the Lord Iesus
Christ.

Unto god king everlasting, immortal, ^. Tim. 1. invisible and wise only, be
all honour and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Examples out of the new Testament.
OUr Saviour Christ when he lived in this world, did all things according Iohn.
5. to his heavenly fathers commandments as he him self saith, as my father hath
given me commandment, so doe I: this did he to give vs example, that in matters
of religion we should attempt nothing as due service unto god, but that only
which we have learned out of his holy word.

The apostles of Christ both taught and wrought that only, which they had
received of their Lord and moister Iesus Christ.

Of these aforesaid Scriptures and histories, majesty thou learn that God is
not worshipped as carnal reason and fleshly wisdom imagines and prescribes, but
as god by his holy word bids, appoints, and commands. A Christen man ought to
follow Christ's steps and to walk, as he hath walked.

Against men's traditions and unwritten verities.
IF Satan or any of his imps unto the derogation of Gods glory. shall at any
time tempt thee with mans tradicions or unwritten veryties, for to give no les
credit unto them, than unto the word of God: avoid him with these scriptures.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
YE shall not ad unto the word that I Deuteronomy. 4 speak, nor take ought from
it.

Ye shall not turue unto the right hand nor unto the left ha^d: but by the way
that the Lord your god hath commanded you ye shall walk: that ye may live and
have good luck.

Keep the commandments of the Deuteronomy. 6 Lord thy god, and the testimonies
and ceremonies, which hee has commanded thee: and do that which is pleasant and
good in the Lords sight, that thou majesty have good luck.

That I co^mau^d thee, do y^ only neither Dan. 12 put to any thing, nor take
ought away.

Put nothing to his words, least thou Pro. 20. be reproved and found a lier.

Wo bee unto them that cal evil good, and good evil: which make darkness light,
and light darkness: that make sower sweet and sweet sower.

Wo be to them that are wise in their Essay. 5 own sight, and think them selves
to have understanding.

Wo be unto you that make unrighteous Essay. 10. laws, and devise things which
be to harde to be kept: through which the poor are oppressed on every side: and
the innocents of my people are therewith robbed of judgment.

Wo be to those shri^ki^g childre^ saith y^ lord Essay. 30. which seek counsel
but not at me: which take a web in ha^d, but not after my will y^ they may heap
one sin upon an other.

Thus saith the Lord, my thoughts Essay. 55 are not your thoughts, and your
ways are not my ways: but as far as the heaue^s are higher then the earth, so
far do my ways exceed yours, and my thoughts your thoughts.

Your lips speak leasinges: and your tong sets out wickedness.

No man regards righteousness, and Essay. 59. no man judges truly.

Every man hops in vain things: and imagines disceite, conceives wickedness,
and brings forth evil.

They breed Cockatrices eggs, and weave the spiders web: Whosoever e^eth of
their eggs dies, but if one tread upon them, their comes up a serpent. Their
web makes no cloth, and they may not cover them with their labours. Their deeds
are the deeds of wickedness, and the work of robbery is in their hands: their
feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood. Their councels
are wicked councels, hate and destruction is in their ways: but y^ way of peace
they know not. In their goings is no equity, their ways are so crooked y^ who
so goes therein, knows nothing of peace.

My people have committed two great Ierem. 2 evils. They have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and dug them pits, pits I say that are broken, and
can hold no water.

Take b^de saith the Lord ye trust in Iere. 7 co^sels that beguile you and do
you no good.

Hear not the words of the Prophets, Iere. 23. that preach their own dreams.

Hear O ye house of Israel, saith the Eze. 18 lord. Is not my way right, or are
not your ways rather wicked?

The children of thy people, say, tush Eze, 33 the way of the Lord is not
right, where as their way is rather vnright.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Jeroboam king of Israel, contrary to Reg. 12 gods word, made two calves of
gold and set them up to be worshipped of people as their gods, but both he and
his posterity were grievously punished for it.

How grievously god punished al such as brought in strau^ge worshippings of
god, or any matters concerning Idolatry or ought else contrary to y^ word of
God, although y^ authors of the^ made the simple people to believe y^ they were
verities, although vnwritte^ as the Papists do now adays, y^ holy scriptures in
divers places do euide^tly show, namely in the books of the kings and of the
chronicles.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
Except your righteousness doth exceed Math. 5 the righteousness of the Scribes
and Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Beware of false Prophets which c^me Math. 7 unto you in sheep clothing, and
inward lie are ravening wolves.

Why do ye transgress the commaunden^ent Math. 15 of God for your tradicions.

Every plant y^ my heaue^ly father hath Mat. 15 not planted, shall be plucked
up by ye rotes.

This is my well-beloved Son, in Math. 17 whom I am well pleased, hear ye him,

Teach them to keep all things that Mat. 28. I have commanded you.

Ye leave the commaundeme^t of god, Mar. 7. and maintain your own
constitutions. Well, ye do caste aside the commaundeme^t of god, to keep your
own tradicions.

If ye abide in my word, ye are my disciples Iohn. 3. in deed, and ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you fre.

He that is of god, hears the words of God.

My sheep hear my voice and I know Iohn. 10 them and they follow me: neither
shall they at any time perish, nor yet shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

He that has my commandments Ioh. 14. and kepeth them, he it is that loves me:
If any man loves me, he will keep my words.

If ye keep my commandments, Iohn. 15. ye shall abide in my law.

Ye are my friends, if ye doe those things that I command you.

Every one that is of the truth, hears Iohn. 19. my voice.

I dare not speak of any of these things Rome. 15. that Christ hath not wrought
by me.

I beseech you brethern, mark them that make division and give occasions of
evil, contrary to the doctrine y^ ye have learned, and avoid them. For they
that are such, serve not the Lord Iesu Christ, but their own bellies: and with
sweet preachi^gs and flattering words, deceive the harts of the simple.

Though we our selves or an Angel fro^ Rome. 15 Heaven, preach any other Gospel
to you then that which we have preached unto you, hold him accursed. As I said
before so say I now again, if any man preach any other thing unto you then that
ye have received, hold him accursed.

Though it be but a mans testament Gal. 3. yet no ma^ despises it or adds any
thing thereto, when it is once allowed: How much more ought nothing to be added
to the tes tament of the most high God, nor yet be taken from it.

Be no more children from he^ceforth, Ephe. 3 wandering and carried with every
wind of doctrine, by the wiliness of men and crafts: whereby they lay await for
vs to deceiu^ vs, but let vs follow the truth in love, and in all things grow
in him which is thy head: that is to say Christ.

Caste away ungodly and old wives fables, 1 Tim. 4. exercise thy self unto
godliness.

If any man teach otherwise, and is not 1. Tim. 6. content with the wholesome
words of our Lord Iesus Christ, and with the doctrine of godliness: He is
puffed up and knows no thing, but wastes his brains about questio^s and strife
of words, whereof spring envy, strife, railing, evil surmisinges, and vain
disputations of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, which think
that lucre is godliness: From such separate thy self.

If any man speak, let him speak as 2. Pet. 4. though it came of gods own
mouth.

Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not god
He that endures in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the Father and the Son.

If there come any unto you and bring 2. Iohn. 1 not this learning, him receive
not to house neither bid him god speed. For he that bid death him god speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds.

Be not carried about with divers and Hebr. 13 strange learnings.

If any man adds to these things, Apo. 22 god shall add unto him the plages
that are written in this book, And if any ma^ shall minish of the words of this
book of this Prophecy, god shall take away his part out of the book of life,
and out of the holy city, and from those things which are written in this book.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Christ rebukes the pharises for bringing Math. 15 their traditions into the
church of God, by that means defacing the glory of Gods most holy word.

Blessed Saint Paule reproves them Col. 2. which be dead with Christ, from the
commandments of the world, and yet suffer themselves still to be led with
traditions, as these for an example touch not, taste not, handle not, andc.
Which all perish through the very abuse after the commandments and doctrins of
men which things outwardly have the similitude of wisdom by superstition and
humbleness of mind. andc.

Thapostles of Christ would not burden Act. 15. the christen congregations with
new and superfluous tradicions, but only charged them with such things as were
necessary.

Saint Paule in his Epistle unto the Gala. 4. Galathians inveighed against
them, which after they have known god, turn again unto nedie and beggarly
ceremonies, traditions or ordinances observing dais months, times and years.

Against the following of ungodly forefathers.
If thou through temptation of the Devil or the ^alse persuasions of
Antichrists Prophets be m^ ^ed at any time to doubt of the truth of gods word
which the papists at this day cal seditious doctrine, new learning and heresy,
because thy forefathers have both beloved and done the contrary* call these
scriptures to thy remembrance.

Sentences out of the old Testament:
Follow not the multitude to do evil. Exod. 23.

Doo not you these things that they Leu. 18. have done, which were before you
neither be ye defiled in them: I am the Lord your God keep my commandments.

The Lord sent his prophets to his people, 4. Reg. 17. saying: return from your
unrighteous ways, and keep my precepts and ceremonies, according to all the law
that I commanded your fathers. But they would not hear, but became stifnecked,
even as their forefathers were stifnecked, which would not obey the Lord God.

Let them put their hope in God, and not Psal. 69. forget the works of the Lord
but seek after his commandments, Let them not be like their forefathers, which
were a froward and a spiteful nation, a nation that would never be true
hearted, nor bear an upright mind toward God.

Be not hard hearted as your forefathers Psal. 125. were, saith the Lord which
chide and rebelled against me.

We have sinned with our forefathers we have done unjustly, and committed
iniquity.

Trust not in rulers nor in the sons Psal. 146. of men, in whom is no health.
For whe^ their breath goes away, they return un to their earth: In y^ day shall
al their thou ^hts, counsels, devises and imaginations come to nought. I have
always said unto your forefathers since I brought them out of the land of Egipt
even unto this day hear my voice, but they would not hear nor once bow their
ear unto it: But every one of them is gone astray in the fr^ wardnes of his
wicked heart, ye the people of Iuda and the men of Jerusalem are also falle^
unto the wickedness of their fore fathers which would not hear my words:
Insomuch that they are already gone away after strange Gods and serve them. The
house of Israel and the house of Iuda, have broke^ ye covenant which I made
with their fathers. Therefore thus saith the lord: Behold I will bring in
extreme punishments upon the^, so y^ they shall not escape fro^ the^.

They shall cry v^to me but I will not hear them. The cities of Iuda and th^
inhabiters of Hierusalem, shall go and cry unto them, to whom they offered
sacrifice: and yet shall they not save the^ in the time of their trouble.
According to the number of thy cities were thy Gods, O Iuda, and after the
number of thy ways, O Hierusalem, haste thou set up altars of abomination to do
sacrifice unto Baalim.

Your forefathers have forsaken me, Ierem. 16. saith the Lord, and they are
gone away after strange Gods, and have served the^ and worshipped them: yea,
they have utterly given me over, and have not kept my law. But you have wrought
more abomination, than all your forefathers have done.

For behold, every one of you walk after the lewdness of his own wicked heart,
and will not hear me.

Their forefathers have broken my covenant Eze. 2. even unto this day, and they
to whom I send thee, are children without all shame, and of such an heart, as
can not be reclaimed.

Walk not in the commandments Eze, 20 of your fathers, nor keep not their
ordinances: neither pollute your selves with their idoles. For I am the lord
your God.

Therefore walk in my precepts, and keep my judgements, and do them.

Confusion of face and utter shame be Dan. 9. unto vs, unto our kings, unto our
rulers: and to our forefathers, which have sinned.

Be not like your forefathers, unto who^ Zach. 1. the Prophets in times past
cried, saying: thus saith the Lord of hostess, turn from your evil ways, and
from your abominable thoughts, but they would not harken nor give any
attendance unto me, saith the Lord.

Our forefathers have sinned, and have 2. Par. 19. done evil in the sight of
the Lord our god. For they have forsaken him, and turned away their faces from
the tabernacles of the Lord our God.

Be not like your forefathers and brethren, 2. Par. 30 which rebelled against
the Lord God of their fathers, and he gave them over into desolation, as ye see
your selves. Be not ye hardnecked now as were your forefathers, but offer your
hand unto the Lord, and come to his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for
ever, and serve the Lord your God, so shall the indignation of his wrath turn
away from you.

Examples out of the old Testament.
CAin ^lewe his brother Abel, and followed Gen. 4. his forefather the devil,
which was a mansleyer from the beginning.

Nadab king of Israel followed his forefather 3. Reg. 15 Hieroboam, co^mitting
idolatry against the lord his God. Therefore Baasa destroyed him and his
kingdom, and all the house of Hieroboam, so that one of the stock remained not
alive.

Ozochias king of Israel followed his 1. Par. 22. wicked forefather Achab, and
grievously sinned against the lord his God. He therefore reigned but a little
time, and also died a miserable death.

Amon king of Iuda, followed his Idolatrous 4. Reg. 21. forefather Manasses,
and did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God. He reigned but
two years, and was slain of his servants in his own house.

Ioakim king of Iuda for^oke the godly 4. Reg. 23. ways of his most virtuous
father king Iosias, and followed the steppes of his wicked forefathers. The
Lord therefore suffered him to reign but three months in Jerusalem, and gave
him over into the hands of his enemies.

Sedechias king of Iuda followed his 4. Reg. 25 wicked forefathers, and
provoked y^ lord his God unto anger. He therefore was deprived of his kingdom,
saw his children slain before his eyes, and afterword he having his eyes
plucked out of his head, was bound in chains, and miserably carried away into
Babilon.

Sentences out of the ne^ Testament.
All that come before me are thieves and Iohn. 10. robbers, but my sheep have
not heard them.

O ye stifnecked and vncircumcised of Act. 7. hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy ghost* as your forefathers did, so do ye.

Which of the Prophets have not your Act. 7. forefathers persecuted.

See that ye pass the time of your pilgrimage 1. Pet. 1* in fear, for as much
as ye know how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible silver and gold from
your vain conversation, which ye received by y^ traditions of the forefathers:
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe Pharisies and the Scribes following Mat. 15. their ungodly forefathers,
observed the traditions of their elders, and neglected the commandments of God.

The Jaws fulfilling the measure of Math. 23. their forefathers, which slew the
Prophets that were sent unto them fro^ God, killed Christ and his blessed
Apostles.

Paule before his conversion following Act. 9. his wicked forefathers the Jaws,
persecuted the congregation of Christ, even as his elders persecuted Christ and
the Prophets.

Against the wicked old customs and long usages.
IF Satan or any of his members labour to pluck thee from gods word unto wicked
old customs and lunge usages, avoid him with these scriptures following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
ACcording to the custom of the land Leu. 18. 3. of Egipt wherein ye dwelt,
shall ye not do: and after the manner of the land of Canaan, whether I will
bring you shall ye not doe, neither walk in their ordinances, but do after my
judgements, and keep my ceremonies to walk therein. I am the lord your God. Ye
shall keep therefore mine ordinances and my judgements, which if a man do, he
shall live in them. I am the lord.

Take heed that ye commit not one of Leu. 18. 30 these abominable customs,
which were committed before you, and loke that ye defile not your self therein.
I am the Lord your God.

An example out of the old Testament.
Even unto this present day do they still 2. Reg. 17 follow their old customs.

They fear not the Lord, neither keep they his ceremonies, his laws and
commandments. The Prophets cried, worship no strange Gods, but fear the Lord
your God, and he shall deliver you from the power of all your enemies. But they
would not hear, but still committed wickedness according to their old custom.
They pretended as though they served the Lord and yet nevertheless did they
also service to their idoles.

For as their forefathers did, so do their sons, and nephews unto this present
day*

Against such as sclaunder Christ's Gospel, by calling it new learning.
IF the adversary of true godliness go about to persuade thee, that Christ's
gospel is new learning, and that therefore thou ought to geu^ no care unto it,
nor believe it: look that thou by n^ means consent unto them, but rather
remember that this is no new blasphemy, but used many years before of wicked
hipocrites, as thou shalt perceive by these examples following.

Examples out of the new Testament.
WHen Christ preached in the Sinagoge Mar. 1. at Capernaum, and healed the man
that was possessed with an unclean spirit, the people cried out and said: what
new learning is this.

When Paule preached at Athens the Acts. ^7. resurrection of the dead, certain
belly gods as the Epicures and Stoikes, strove with him and said: what means
this prattler? Other said, he seemed to be a preacher of new devils. An other
company said, may we not know what new learning this is, that thou show? Thou
bring in new things in deed unto our ears. Our old fathers never taught vs any
such gear. We will know what these things mean.

Against pensiveness and thought taking for the life.
IF thou be troubled for the preservation of thy life either in sickness,
trouble, persecution, imprisonment, or otherwise, comfort thy self with these
scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THe Lord kills and gives life again. 1. Reg. 2. He brings even to hell, and
back again.

The Lord is my light and my health whom then should I fear? The Lord is Psal.
27. the strength of my life, of whom then should I be afraid: though an host of
men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid. And though there
arose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

He hath given his Angels charge of Psal. 91. thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways.

The Angel of the Lord shall be sent Psal. 34. among all them that fear him,
and shall deliver them.

The sourges of the sea are marvelous, Psal. 93. yea the lord on high is rather
marvelous.

They consented all against me, they co^spired Psal. 31. to take away my life,
but in thee (O Lord) have I trusted, and I said, thou art my God, In thy hand
are my destinies.

Many tribulations fall on y^ righteous, Psal. 34. but from them all, the lord
delivers the^. The Lord kepeth all their bones, so that not one of them shall
be broken.

The health of the righteous is of the Psal. 37. Lord, and he defended them in
the time of their trouble. Yea the lord will help them and deliver them, and
set the^ harmless from the ungodly: and save them because they have trusted in
them.

Thou haste limited the waters these Psal. 104. bounds: which they may not
pass.

The Lord is my helper, I will not fear Psal. 118. what man doe unto me. The
Lord is my deliverer, therefore will I set nought by mine enemies.

The Lord hath given a co^maundeme^t: Psal. 148. and none shall go beyond it,
Fire, Hail, Snow, Ise, and vapours, stormy winds accomplish his word.

Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh Eccle. 5 for to sin, neither say thou
before the Angel, there is no providence: least peradventure the Lord being
angry against thy words do destroy all the works of thy hands.

Life and death are of God. Eccle. ^

Thy providence (O father) governs Sap. 14 all things fro^ the beginning.

Thou (O Lord) art he which hast power of life and death. Who can say that any
thing can be done without the Lords co^maundement? From the mouth of the
highest, goes there not good and ill?

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
ESau burned with an immortal hatred Gen. 27. 32. 33. against his brother
Iacob: because of the blessing wherewith his father had blessed him: and
purposed fully in his hart to kill his brother. But Iacob prayed unto the Lord,
and he mollified Esaus hart, in so much, that when Iacob thought that both he
and his should be slain, his brother Esau came gently unto him, lovingly
embraced him, kissed him friendly, and for very joy wept: so mighty is God to
mollify tira^ntes hearts, when it pleases him, and to make them gracious and
favourable to his servants.

Saule persecuted Dauid cruelly, purposing 1. Reg. 1^. to kill him, but his
labour was in vain.

Iezabel threatened and swear to sley Helias, 3. Reg. 19. but the Lord
preserved him.

Satan could doe nothing to Iob, till Iob. 2. God suffered him: neither
exercised he his cruelnes any further against Iob, than he was appointed of
God.

The godly woman Susan through the Dan. 8. false accusations of ye two wicked
judges was at y^ point to be stoned unto death, but God wonderfully delivered
her from the hands of her enemies.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
Fear not them which kill the body, Mat. 10. and be not able to kill the soul.
But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Are
not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And none of them fall on the ground
without the will of your father. Yea all the hairs of your head are numbered.
Fear not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

Ye be come out as unto a thief with Math. 26. swords and staves. When I was
daily with you in the temple, ye laid no hand upon me, but this is your hour
and the power of darkness.

Thou coldest have no power at all against Iohn. ^. me ( said Christ unto
Pilot) except it were given thee from aboue.

All things are of him, by him and Math. 12. in him.

If we live, we live to be at the Lords Rome. 14 will. And if we die, we die at
the Lords will. Whether we live therefore or die, we are in the Lords hand.

Behold, I am alive saith Christ, for Apoc. 1. evermore: and have the keys of
death ^nd hell.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
Mat. 8. THe ship, wherein Christ and his Disciples were, was grievously tossed
with the waives of the sea, through y^ wind and the tempest that arose, in so
much that it was at the point of drowning. Notwithstanding, neither water,
wind, nor tempest, did once hurt it. Math. 8

The devils had no power to enter into swine till Christ gave them leave. If
thou cast vs forth, said they, suffer vs to enter into the herd of swine.
Christ answered, Iohn. 7. go ye, and they went.

The Jaws did seek to kill Christ, but his time was not then come. No man did
set his hands on him because his hour was not yet come.

They went about to take Christ, but Iohn. 10. he escaped from the midst of
their hands.

There came certain of ye Pharisees and Luke. 13. said unto Christ, get thee
out of the way, and depart bence. For Herode will kill thee. And he said unto
the^, go and tell that Fore: behold I cast out devils, and heal y^ people to
day and to morrow, and the iii. day I make an end. Nevertheless, I must walk to
day, and to morrow, and the day following: for it can not be that a prophet
perish any other where then at Jerusalem.

Herode threw Peter in prison, bound Acts. 12. him fast with chains: and set
certain soldiers for the more assurance to keep him, purposing after Easter to
bring him forth unto the people, and so to have slain him. But God being
mightier then all the tyranny and power of the world sent his Angel, and
delivered Peter out of prison.

Paule being at Milete gathered a Act. 28. bundel of sticks, and put them in
the fire, and suddenly there came a venomous adder, otherwise called a Viper,
out of the heate, and leapt on his hand. The men

The men that were present and saw this thing waited when he should have
swollen or fallen down dead sodynly.

But Paule shoke of the vermin into the fire and felt no harm.

Against hunger, poverty, or carefulness of living.
IF at any time thou be tempted with the carefulness of living, comfort thy
self with these holy scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THey that fear the Lord, shall have no scarceness. They which seek the Lord
Psal. 33* shall want no good thing.

Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, and upon them that
Psal. 34 trust in his mercy, y^ he may deliver their lives from death and
norishe them in the time of honger.

I have been young and am waxe^ old, and I have not seen the righteous
forsaken, Psal. 37* nor his children begging their bread on the earth.

Lay thy care on the Lord, and he shall norishe thee. Psal. 55

All creatures depend upon thee (O Lord) that thou shouldest give them meat
Psal. 10^ in due time. For thou giving it them, they take it, and thou opening
thy hand, they are well satisfied.

But thou hiding thy face they are sorrowful, and thou taking away their
breath, they are but dead, and turned into y^ earth that they came of.

The eyes of all things loke upon thee, Psal. 165 (O Lord) and thou gave them
meat in due time. Thou openest thy hand, and replenishest all things living
with thy bless singe.

The Lord gives meat to the hungry. Psal. 166.

The blessing of the Lord makes men Pro. 10. rich: and there shall no grief
accompany them.

The Lord will not let the soul of the righteous suffer hunger, but hee puts
the ungodly from his desire.

He that tills his land shall have ple^ Pro. 12 teousnes of bread, but he that
followed idleness, is a very fool.

Good and evil, life and death, poverty Eccle. 11. and riches are of God. Trust
in god, abide in thy place. For it is an easy thing in the sight of God,
quickly to enrich a pore ma^.

Fear not my son, we lead a pore Tob* 4 life, notwithstanding we shall have
plenty of all good things, if we fear the Lord depart from all sin, and do
well.

Examples out of the old Testament.
GOd fed the people of Israel with meat Exod. 16* from heaven, and gave them
drink out of the rock.

God sent meat by the Ravens to Helias. 3. Reg. 17.

The Angel of god took Abacuk by Dan. 14 the top, and bare him by the hear of
the head, and thorough a mighty wind set him upon the den where Daniel was
prisoner: and gave him that meat, which the Prophet had prepared for his
reapers,

Sentences out of the new Testament.
MAn shall not live with bread alone, Math. 4 but, with every word that co^
meth out of the mouth of god.

Take no thought, saying what shall Math. 6 we eat? or what shall we dri^k? or
wherewith shall we be clothed, after these things seek y^ heathen. For your
heavenly father know eth y^ ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first
the kingdom of god, and the righ teousnesse thereof: and all these things shall
be caste unto you.

God gives vs abundantly all things to enjoy them. 1. Tim. ^*

I will not fail thee, nor yet forsake thee. Hebr. 13

Examples out of the new Testament.
Christ at the marriage, turned water in Iohn. 2 to wine.

Christ with five barley loves and two Math. 10 fishes, fed five thousand
people and yet remained. xii. baskets full of fragments.

Against keeping of evil company.
When the Devil, the Flesh or the world move thee to resort unto any evil
company, defend the self from it with remembering these scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
HE shall dwell in the Lords tabernacle Psalm. 15. and rest upon his ^oly hill
which sets not by the ungodly, but makes much of them that fear the Lord.

With the holy shalt thou be holy, and Psalm. 19. with the innocent thou shalt
be innocent. With the clean thou shalt be clean, and with the froward, thou
shalt be froward.

A froward hart, shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person.

Who so hath a proud loke and an high sto Psal. 101 make, I may not away with
him. Mine eyes shall look for such as be faithful in the land, that they may
dwell with me, and who so leads a godly life, shall be my servant. There shall
no deceitful person dwell in my house.

He that tells lies shall not tarry in Psal. 119 my sight,

I hate the ungodly, but thy law O Lord do I love.

My Son, if sinners entice thee unto Pro. 1. wickedness, lean not unto them.

If they say, come go with vs, let vs lay await for blood, and convey our
selves privily to trap the innocent. Let vs swalow them up quickly like hell,
and devour the perfect like a whirl pit. For thus shall we find great retches,
and garnish our houses with oil. Cast in thy foot among vs, and let vs make a
common purse.

My son, walk not with them, but refrain thy feet from their ways, for their
feet run unto mischief. In vain are nets spread abroad for birds before their
eyes. For even these men lay await among them selves one to shed another blood.

Neither are their own lives in safeguard amo^g the^ selves. These are y^ paths
of covetous men among whom one spares not the life of another.

Come not in the path of the ungodly Pro. 4 and walk not in the way of the
wicked. Eschew it, and go not therein, depart aside, and pass over by it. For
they cannot sleep except they have first done some mischief. For they eat the
bread of wickedness and drink the wine of robbery. The path of the righteous
shines as the light, and is ever brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.
But the way of the ungodly is as y^ darkness wherein men fall or they be aware.

Who so accompanies the wise, shall Pro. 13 have wisdom, but he that is a
companion of foals, shall prove like them.

Travail not by the way with him that Eccle. 6 is brainless, least he doo thee
evil.

For he followed his own wilfulness and so shalt thou perish thorough his
folly.

Strive not with him that is angry and cruel, go not with hi^ into the
wilderness, for blood is nothing in his sight, and where there is no help, hee
shall murder thee.

Loke not upon a woman that is desirous of many men, least thou fall into her
Eccle. 9 snares.

Use not the company of a woman that is a player and a dancer, and hear her not
least, thou perish through her enticing

Behold not a maiden, that thou be not hurt in her beauty. Eccle. 1^

Bring not every ma^ into thine house for the disceitfull lays wait diversely.
Eccle. 1^

Who will have pity on the charmer that is stinged of the serpent, or of all
such as come no the beasts? Even so is it with him that kepeth company with a
wicked man, and lappeth him self in his sins. Eccle. 13

He that touches pitch shall be defiled of it, and he that kepeth company with
a proud person, shall also become proud and stately.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Ge. 11. 12 ABraham because he would not be partaker of their Idolatry, fled
from the* people of Child, being his native country. Ge. 19

Lot at the commandment of the An gels, departed out of Sodomy, least he tari
yng with y^ Sodomites, should have ben consumed with them. Ge. 12

Sara would not suffer Ismael which was given to mocking, to keep company with
her Son Isaac, least he also should become a mocker. Ge. 33

Iacob would not keep co^pany with his Brother Esau, although greatly entreated
least some wickedness should thereof have happened.

Moyses at Gods appointment commanded Number. 16. the people to depart from the
dwelling places of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, least they also be wrapped in
their sins and so perish among them.

Iosaphat king of Iuda, was almost slain 3. Reg. 22. in the bartail, because he
kept company and we^t unto the wars we wicked king Achab.

After his return also he was greatly ^. Par. 19 rebuked of Iehu, for so doing.

When all the people went to worship Tob. 1. the Golden calves which Jeroboam
had made: Tobias only fled away from the company of them all and went to
Jerusalem unto the Lords temple, and there worshipped the Lord God of Israel.

So long as Iudas Machabeus did put Mac. 89 his trust in the Lord, all things
prospered well with him: but when he bega^ to join friendship and to keep
co^pany with the hey the^ and the Romaines, shortly after he was overcome and
slain in battle.

The like thing chanced to Ionathas. Mac. 12.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
GO not into the ways that lead unto ^ath. 10 the heathen, and into the Cities
of the Samaritans, enter ye not.

I beseech you brethern, mark them Rome. 16 which cause division and give
occasions of evil, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid
them.

Do ye not know that a little leue^ sow ^. Cor. 5 reth the whole lump of dow.
Purge therefore the old leaven, that ye may be new dow ^s ye are sweet bread.

I wrote unto you that ye should not keep company with whoremongers

If any that is called a brother that is to say (a Christen man) bee a
whoremonger, or a covetous person, or a worshipper of images, either a rayler,
or a dronkarde, or an extorcioner: with him that is such se ye neither eat, nor
yet keep company.

Put away from among you that evil person.

We require you brethern in the name 2. These. 3 of our Lord Iesus Christ, that
ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walk inordinately, and not
after the institution which ye received of vs.

If any teach otherwise, and is not content 1. Tim. 6 with the wholesome words
of our lord Iesu Christ, and with y^ doctrine of godliness, he is puffed up,
and knows nothing, but wastes his brains about questions and strife of words,
where of spring envy, strife railings, evil surmisinges, and vain disputations
of men with corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, which think that lucre
is Godliness: From such separate thy self.

A man that is given to heresy, after the Titus. 3 first and second admonition
avoid. Remembering that he that is such, is perverted and sins, even dampned by
his own judgment.

If there come any unto you, and bring ^. Iohn. 1 not this learning, hi^
receive notto house, neither bid him GOD speed. For he that bids him god speed
is, partaker of his ill deeds.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Luke. 22 Peter so long as he kept company with Christ and Christs disciples,
he concinued in the truth, preached the truth, confessed openly Christ to be
the son of the living god: and promised that he would not only go into prison,
but also unto the very death with Christ, but when he once came into the court
into the Byshoppes house, he straight ways was stricken with such fear, that a
poor maid and a simple Simme Shakebuckler, made him both to deny and also to
forswear Iesus Christ his Lord and moister: whom before he had boldly so oft
confessed before the world. Saint Peter preaching to the believing and
repentant Jaws among other his godly exhortations, commanded them, to save
themselves from the untoward generation of the unfaithful, and to flee the
company of such as deny Iesus to bee Christ and the son of the living God. Act.
7. 8. ^

Saule keeping company with the vnfaith full Jaws as with the bishops, the
priests the pharises, andc. became a grievous persecutor of the christen
congregation, but being delivered from their fellowship he be came a worthy
Apostle, and a fervent prea cher of gods truth.

Against Idleness.
IF Satan move the unto idelnes, which is the well spring and rote of al vice,
^et before the eyes of thy mind both these sentences and examples of the holy
scripture.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
The Lord toke Adam, and put him into Ge. 2. the garden of Eden, that he might
dress and keep it.

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat Gene. 3 thy bread, until thou
teturnest into the earth, from whence thou wast taken. For dust thou art and
into dust thou shalt bee turned again.

A man is borne to labour, and a bird Iob. 5. to fly.

Thou shalt eat the labour of thy hand. Psal. 128

Go to the Emmet (thou fluggarde) consider Pro. 6 her ways, and learn to be
wise. She hath no guide nor overseer, nor ruler: yet in the summer she provides
her meat, and gathered her food together in the harvest. How long wilt thou
slep thou sluggish man? When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? Yea sleep on
still a little, slum ber a little, fold thine hands together yet a little that
thou majesty sleep: ^o shall poverty come unto, the as one that traualeth by
the way, and oppress thee like a thief.

If thow be not stouthful thy harvest shall come as a springing well, and
poverty shall fly far from thee.

Who so gathered in summer is wise, Pro. 10 but he that is sluggish in harvest,
brings himself to confusion.

The sluggard would ^aine have, and ca^ Pro. 13. not get his desire, but the
soul of the^ that work shall have plenty. Pro. 2^

A ^outhfull body will not go to plow for cold in Winter, therefore shall he go
a begging in summer, and have nothing.

Delight not in sleep, least thou come un to poverty, but open thine eyes, that
thou may have bread enough. Pro. 2^

He that tills his land shall have ple^teousnesse of bread, but he that follows
idleness, shall have poverty enough.

Idlensse hath been the occasion of much Eccle. 33 evil and wickedness.

Behold the sins of Sodom were these Ezech. 1^ pride, fullness of meat,
abundance, and idleness.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Adam gate his living with the labour of Ge. 2. 3 his hands, and the sweat of
his brows.

Caine was a ploughmen and tilled the Ge. 4 earth.

Abel was a shepherd and kept sheep.

Iubal was a Musicion and exercised Music.

Thubal Caine was a Smithe, and a graver in mettle.

Nohe was a Planter of Vineyards. Gen. 9

Abraham, Lot, Isaac, and Iacob, were Ge. 13. 2^ Ploughmen and shepeheardes.

Ioseph was a magistrate and a public Ge. 14 minister in the common weal of
Egipt under king Pharao.

Moyses was a shepherd and kept the Exo. 3 sheep of Iethro his Father in law,
Priest of Madian.

The Children of Israel got their living with hard and painful labour in Egipt
Exod. 1 under king Pharao.

Dauid before he was anointed king of Israel, was a shepherd.

All the preistes and leuites of the old Exod. 28 law, every man according to
his vocation laboured by giving attendance in the te^ ple, by killing of beasts
and offering of sacrifices, by studiyng the scriptures of god and teaching the
same unto the people.

Amos the Prophet was one of ye shep ^mos. 1 herds of Thecua.

Abacuk the Prophet travailed in husbandry. ^an. 14

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
LEt vs not be weary of well doing. For ^al. 6 when the time is come, we shall
reap without werines.

Let him that stole, steal no more: but ^he. 4 let him rather labour with his
hands the thing which is good, that he may give to him that needs.

We beseech you brethern that ye study. 1. These. 4 to be quiet, and to meddle
with your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you.

When we were with you, we gave you 2. These. 3 this commandment, that if any
man will not labour, the same should not eat. Let*all men work with quietness
and eat their own bread.

Examples out of the new Testament.
CHrist was a carpenter. Math. 6

The Apostles of Christ were fisher Math. 4 men. Act. 20

Paule laboured with his own hands, and get both his own living and others that
were with him.

Saint Luke was a Phisicion, and as Col. 4 some write a painter also.

Aquila was a maker of tents, of the Act. 18 which occupation saint Paule was.

Simon S. Peters host was a tanner. Act. 10

Dorcas that virtuous woman made Act. 9 garments with her own hands and gave
them to the poor people

YE have heard how it was said to them Math. 5 of ye old time, thou shalt not
forswear thy self, but shalt perform unto the Lord those things that thou
swearest. But I say unto you swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is
Gods seat: nor by the earth for it is his footestole, neither by Ierusale^, for
it is the City of the great King: neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because
thou can not make one hair white or black. But your communication shall be yea,
yea, nay, nay. For whatsoever is added more then these, it comes of evil.

Aboue all things my brethren swear Iacob. 5 not, neither by heaven, neither by
earth, nether any other other. Let your yea, be yea and your nay, nay, least ye
fall into hypocrisy.

Examples out of the new Testament.
HErod to perform his wicked and devilish Math. 14 other which he had made to
the daughter of* Herodias his whore for her pleasant dancing, suffered and
commanded the head of that most godly preacher saint Iohn Baptist, to be cut
of. Let all men therefore beware of vayn, rash and wicked oaths.

Saint Peter, when it was laid to his Math. 2^ chardge, that he was one of
Christ's disciples* swear that he knew not the ma^. But afterword he bitterly
wept for his swearing and denying of Christ. Let vs also lament and be sorry
sor our idle and wicked manner of swearing and lean it, and praise t^e name of
the Lord our God.

Against lying. slandering and filthy or unclean talk
IF Satan at any time moves thee to abuse thy tongue contrary to the will of
God, either in lying slandering, or other wicked and idle words resist his
temptation ^ these scriptures following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THou shalt eschew lying. Exod. 23

Ye shall not lye, neither shall any Leuit. 19 of you deceive his neighbor.

Thou (O Lord) shalt destroy all them Psal. 6. that speak lies.

There be six things that God hates, Pro. 6 and the seventh hee utterly abhors.
A proud countenance, a lying tong, hands defiled with innocent blood, an heart
imagining wicked councels, feet swift unto mischief, a false witness, the sower
of discord among brethren.

Lying lips are abhominatio^ to the lord: Pro. 2 but they that do faithfully,
please him.

A false witness shall not escape unpunished, ^ro. 19 and he that speaks lies,
shall pea rich and come to nought.

He that gathered his goods with a lie ^ro. 14 ing tongue shall leese all, and
be in peril of his life. He that kepeth his tongue, kepeth his life from
troubles.

A lying witness shall perish, have thou ^ccle. 7 no delete to speak lies
against thy brother, nor yet against thy friend: have no pleasure in lying, for
the use thereof is nought.

The mouth that lies sleyeth, the soul. ^ap. 1.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
Satan brought forth the first lie, when Gene. 3. he made our grandmother Eve
believe that if she and her husband did eat of the forbidden fruit, they should
be as Gods. Therefore, is he a liar and the Father of lying. ^an. 3.

The two judges which accused the most virtuous woman Suzanne of uncleanness,
because she would not agree to their most filthy and dishonest request: were
most abominable liars and slanderers, but they received a reward worthy their
lying.

All the false prophets of ye old law which ^ained them selves to be sent of
God, and yet prophesied lies to please the Princes and rulers withal, were
liars and blasphemers of God.

Sentences out of the new Testament:
LYing set aside, let every man speak the Ephe. 4 truth to his neighbour for as
much as we are members together.

Lye not one to another. Col. 3.

Let no filthy communication proceed Ephe. 4* out of your mouths, but y^ which
is good to edify. Let all bitterness, fierceness, and wrath, roaring and cursed
speaking be put away from you, with all maliciousnes. Be courteous one to
another and merciful, for geui^g one an other eue^, as god for christ's sake
forgave you.

Let neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, Ephe. 5 neither jesting, which
are not comely, be once named among you, but rather thanksgiving.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe Scribes and the Phariseis with ye Math. 1^ other enemies of Christ which
called Christ a wine bibber, a glotton, a deceiver of ye people, a blasphemer,
one possessed we a devil, such one as forbade the people to pay tribute unto
Caesar. andc, were most ab hominable liers and blasphemers.

Ananias and Saphira died suddenly, because Act. 5. they lied.

They were liers and blasphemers, which Act. 6. said that the blessed Martyr
saint Stephe^, spake blasphemous words against Moyses and against God: when of
God, no man spake more godly, nor of Moses more reverently.

They also that complained of the Aposties Acts. 17. of Christ, calling them
sedicious persons and teachers of new learning, were also liers and slanderers.

So many as make or love lies, shall be cast ^po. 22 among murderers and
Idolatrers in the lake of hell, burning with fire and brimstone

Against pride or vain glory.
IF thou be tempted unto pride or vain glory of the devil that old enemy of
mankind: defend thy self with these scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Thou shalt save (O Lord) the people Psal. 18. that are humble, meke and lowly:
but the high look of the proud thou shalt bring down.

The Lord will save such as be of an Psal. 33. humble spirit.

The Lord hates a proud countenance

Disoain pride* a wicked way, and a mouth Pro. 8 that is double tonged, I
utterly abhor, saith the Lord.

The Lord abhors all such as be of a Pro. 16 proud heart, his hand, is against
their hand, and they shall not escape unpunished.

Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to divide the spoil
with the proud.

Presumptuousness goes before destruc tion, and after a proud stomach there
foal loweth a fall.

Why art thou proud, thou earth and Eccle. 10 ^ ashes? Pride is hated before
God and man Pride is the beginning of all sin, and ^e that maintained that
shall be cursed, and at the last he utterly destroyed.

God hath destroyed the seats of proud Princes, and set up meek in their stead.

Wo be unto you that are wise in your Essay. 5 own eyes.

I hate the pride of Iacob, and I abhor Amos. ^ his palaces, ^ayth the Lord.

Let never pride have rule in thy mind Tob. 4 nor in thy word: for in pride
began all destruction*

Examples out of the old Testament
LUcifer for his pride fell down from the Essay. 14. glory of heaven into the
pains of hell.

Pharao for his pride was plagued, and Exo. 14 at last drowned.

Sennacherib for all his boasting, pride, ^Reg. 19. and proud crakes, cowardly
fled away and afterword was slain of his own son.

Nabuchodonozor was so punished for ^an. 4 his pride, that he was made of man a
beast till he had given over his pride, confessed him self to be but a man, and
that God alone is the Lord, worthy all glory and honour.

Proud Aman was hanged on those ga ^est, 13 lowes, which he had set up for good
Mardocheus.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Learn of me says Christ, for I am Iath. 11 meek and humble in hart.

He that eralteth him self shall be made ^ath. 15. lowe, and he that lowly
meketh and submits him self, shall be exalted.

Be not hie minded, but make your selves ^om. 12. equal to them of the lower
sort. Be not wise in your own opinions.

What hast thou, that thou hast not received. 1. Cor. 4. If thou have received
it, why reioy sest thou, as though you hast not received it.

Humble your selves in the sight of the In. 4 Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Submit your selves every man one 1. Pet. 5. to another, knit your selves
together in lowliness of mind.

For God resisted the proud, and gives 1. Pet. 5. grace to the humble. Submit
your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt you, when
the time is come.

Examples out of the new Testament.
MAry that blessed virgin being meke Luck. 1. humble, and lowly, was made the
mother of our Lord and Saviour Iesu Christ.

Peter, Iames, Andrew, Iohn and the other Math. 4 disciples of Christ, were
humble and low lie in their own eyes, and estranged fro^ all pride and
arrogance. Christ therefore chosed them to be his Apostles.

Our Saviour Christ disdained not to Iohn. 13. wash his disciples fete, to give
vs an example of humility and of brotherly love, The proud Pharisy was rejected
and cast away as unrighteous because hee bosted him self of his good deeds, and
despised the poor Publican. Act. 1^.

King Herod upon a day appointed, a rayed himself in royal, apparel, set him in
his seat, and made an oration unto the people.

The people gave a shout, saying, it is the voice of a god and not of a man.
And immediately the angel of the lord smote him, because he gave not god the
honour, and he was eaten of the worms and gave by the ghost.

Against feasting, glotony, and drunkenness.
TO avoid feasting, glotony and drunkenness* set these holy scriptures ever
before the eyes of thy mind.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Wine make folk lecherous and dronkenship causes braw^ing and chiding Who so
hath a pleasure in them shall not be wise.

He that loves banquets, shall be brought* Pro. 20 to poverty. Whosoever
deliteth in wine and de licious meates shall not be rich.

Accompany not with riotous drinkers Pro. 33. and eaters, for such shall come
to poverty, and such sluggish slippers shall go all to rag general. Where is
wo? Where is wailing? where is strife? where are trips laid? where are wounds
without a cause? where are bloody eyes? Do not al these things chance unto
them, that sit always at the wine, and give their minds wholly to gulling and
glossing.

Wo be to you that rise up early to give Essay. 5 your selves to drunkenness,
and set al your minds so on drinking, that ye sit sweating thereat until it be
night. The harp, the Lute, the Tabor, the droumslade, the trumpet, the shalme,
and plenty of wine are at their feasts: but the works of the Lord do ye not
behold, neither consider ye the works of his hand.

Woo be unto you that are strong to drink wine, and are mighty to advance
drunkenness.

Fornication, wine and drunkenness, Ose. 5. take away the hart.

Thorough feasting many have died, but he Eccle. 23 that eats in mean shall
prolong his life.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Adam and Eve by satisfying their gred^ Ge. ^. appetite in eating the forbidden
fruit, did not only transgress the commandment of god, but also throw both
themselves, and al their posterity into everlasting da^pnation, if we had not
been redeemed by Christ.

The stinking Sodomits by giving the^ Eze, 16 selves to inordinate eating and
drinking, fell unto unnatural lusts, and so most miserably perished.

Thorough drunkenness, Lot committed Gen. 9. incest with his own daughters.

The people of Israel giving their mind Exod. 32 unto bancketting, fell into
Idolatry.

Holofernes that most Valiant captain Iudith. 13 being drunken, was slain of a
woman.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
Take heed that your hart be not overwhelmed Luc. 21. with feasting and
dronkenship.

Let vs walk honestly, as in the day Rome. 13 time: not in banqueting and
dronkennns, not in chambring and wantonness, nor in strife and enuiyng: but put
ye on the Lord Iesus Christ. And make not provision for the flesh to fulfil the
lusts thereof.

Banketeing add drunkenness are the Gal. 5 works of the flesh.

Be not drunken with wine wherein is Ephe. 5 lechery, but ye be filled with the
spirit.

It is a good thing that the hart be established Hob. 13 with grace, and not
with meates, which have not profited them: they have had their pastime in them.

Dronkardes shall not inherit the kingdom 1. Cor, 6 of God.

Be ye sober and watch, for your adversary 1. Pet. 5 the Devil goes about like
roaring Lion, sekyng whom he may devour: who^ see that ye resist, being strong
in faith.

Examples out of the new Testament.
Herod giving his mind to banqueting, Mat. 14. granted that the holy man Iohn
Baptist should bee beheaded at the desire of his whorish daughter.

That evil servant, which saith in his Ma. 24 hart, my Lord will be long a
coming, and so begin to smite his fellows, yea and to eat and drink with the
drunken: The same servants lord shall come in a day when hee looks not for him,
and in an hour that he is not ware of, and shall hew him in pieces, and give
him his portion with the Hipocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

The rich gloton that fared so daintily Luke. 16. every day, was cast down into
hell, and most grievously punished,

Against Fornication and adultry.
IF at any time thou be tempted of the Devil of the world, and the flesh, to
defile thy self with fornication, adultery, whoredom, incest, or with any other
uncleanness: call these sentences and examples of the holy Scripture to
remembrance, and valiantly resist those most wicked temptacions.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou Exod. 10. shalt not lye with thy
neighbours wife to defile her with sede.

Thou shalt not make thy daughter com mon, that thou would cause her to bee an
whore.

The man that breaks wedlock with an other mans wife, even he that breaks
wedlock with his neighbours wife let him be slain, both ye aduoterer and ye
aduoutres.

If a priests daughter fall to play the Leuit. 21 whore, she defiles her
father: therefore must she be burnt with fire.

If a man be found lying with a woman that hath a w^dded husband, they shall
die either of them, both the man that lay with the wife, and also the wife: and
so shalt thou ^ away euell from Israel.

Cursed be he that lies with his neighbours Deuteronomy. ^7 wise, and all the
people shall say. Amen.

There shall be no whore of the daughters Deuteronomy. 23 of Israel, nor no
whoremonger of the sons of Israel.

An whore gives sweet words, forsakes Pro. 2 the husband of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her god. Her house is inclined unto death, and her
paths unto hell. All they that go into her, come not again, nether take they
hold of the way of life.

The lips of an harlot, are a dropping Pro. 5 honey comb, and her neck is
softer then oil: but in the end she is as bitter as wormwood, and as sharpe as
is a swerd. Her feet go down unto death, and her steps hast them into hell.

Wherefore dear child give ear unto me, and swerve not from my words. Fly fro^
her ways, and come not once so neigh ^s unto her doors.

Keep thee from the evil woman and Pro. 6 from the flattering tong of the
harlot, that thou lust not after her beauty in thine hart and le^t thou be
take^ with her fair looks.

An harlot will make a man to beg his bread, but a married woman will hunt^ for
the precious life.

May a man hide fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Or can one go
upon coals, and his feet not be hurt? Even so, whosoever goes into his
neighbours wife, and touches her, cannot be vngilty.

He that is an whoremonger, is a fool and brings his life to destruction. He
gets himself also shame and dishonour, such as shall never be put out.

He that accompanies himself with an Pro. 9 whore, shall go down unto hell: but
he that goes away from her, shall be saved.

He that medleth with an whore, is a Prou. 18 fool and without wit.

He that maintains whores, shall come Prou. 29 unto beggary.

If mine hart hath lusted after my neighbours ^b. 31. wife, or if I have laid
weight at his door: Oh then let my wife grind unto another man, and let other
men ly^ with her. For this is a wickedness and sin that is worthy to be
punished, yea a fire that should utterly consume and ^ out al my substance.

My son, keep thee well from all whore ^ob. 4 doom, and beside thy wife see
that no ^aut be found in thee.

Cast not thy mind upon harlots in any manner of thing, least thou destroy both
thy self and thy heritage.

Go not about gasinge in every lane Eccle. ^ of the City, neither wander thou
abroad in the streets thereof.

Turn away thy face from a beautiful woman, and look not upon the fairness of
other.

Sit not with another mans wife by any means, lye not with her upon the bed,
make no words with her at the wine, lest thy hart consent unto her, and thou
with thy blood fall into destruction.

A man that breaks wedlock, and re Eccle. 23 gardeth not his soul, but saith,
tush, who sees me? I am co^passed about with dark nes, the walls cover me no
body sees me Whom need I to fear? the highest will not remember my sins. He
understands not that his eyes, see all things, for all such fear of me^, drives
away the fear of God from him. For he fears only the eyes of men, and
considered not that the eyes of the Lord are clearer then the Sun, beholding
all the ways of men, and the ground of the deep, and looking even to men's
hearts in secrete places. andc. Read forth the Chapiter to the end.

Examples out of the old Testament.
God drowned once all the whole world Ge. 7 (eight persons only excepted) for
the sin of uncleanness.

God poured down from heaven water Ge. 19 fire, and brimstone upon the
Sodomites, Gomorrians and such other, and destroyed them al for their
abominable vncleanes.

When Sychem the son of Hemor had Gene. 34 violently deflowered Dina the
daughter of Iacob, her brothers hearing of the matter, slew not only Sichem and
Hemor, but also al the men and men children that were in the city, and
afterword spoiled the city. And when Iacob their father talked with them of the
matter, they answered, should they deal with our sister, as with an whore?

When it was told Iuda, that Thamar Gen. 28 his daughter in law had played the
whore and with playing the whore was become great with child. Iuda her father
in law answered and said, bring her forth that she may be brent.

Ioseph feared god and would not consent Gene. 29 unto his Lords wife in any
point of vnclenes, but chosed rather to be cast into prison, then he would
commit so great wickedness, and defile his Lords wife. Therefore did God bless
him, and brought him to high degree.

There were slain in one day of y^ Jaws Number. 25 24. thousand, for the
whoredom that they committed.

For the defloring of a certain Leuites Iudith. 2 wife, there were destroyed mo
the^ an hun dred thousand people.

Dauid committed adultery with Bethsabe 2. Reg. ^ Urias wife, but he escaped
not vnplaged

Solomon before he doted in love of wome^ 3. Reg. ^ was wholly given to the
setting forth of Gods honour, but being once nous^ed with their love, he did
not only neglect the glory of the alone true and living God, but he also
thorough the entisment of these women, fell unto the worshipping of strange
gods and so he provoked the high displeasure of God against him and his realm.

Susan feared God, and desired rather Dan. 1^ to be stoned unto death then she
should de file her husbands bed or once consent to the two filthy Judges, and
so become an whore, god therefore preserved her.

Sentences out of the new Testament:
Ye have heard that it was said to the^ ^ath. 5 of old time, thou shalt not
commit adultry. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on another mans wife
to lust after her, hath committed adultry already with her in his heart.

It seems good to the holy ghost, and to ^ct. 15 vs, to charge you that ye
abstain from whoredom.

Keep no company with whoremongers. Cor. 5

If any that is called a brother, that is to say, a christen man, be an
whorehunter, with such one se that ye eat not.

Neither whoremongers nor adulterers, ^. Cor, 6 nor weakelynges neither abusers
of them selves with mankind, shall inherit the kingdom of god.

Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ, shall I now take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Do ye
not know that he which couples him? self with an harlot, is become one body.
For two saith he shall be one flesh. But he that is joined to the Lord is one*
spirit whoredom. Every sin that a man doth is without the body. But he that is
a whoremonger sins against his own by die. Know ye not how that your bodies are
the temple of the holy ghost, which dwell in you whom ye have of god, and how
ye are not your own. For ye are dearly bought. Therefore glorify god in your by
dyes and in your spirits, which are gods.

To avoid whoredom, let every man 1. Cor. 7* have his wife, and let every woman
have her husband.

It is better to marry then to burn. Gal. 5 Adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wanton nes. andc. are works of the flesh and whosoever doth them, shall not
inherit y^ kingdom of god.

Let not whoredom or uncleanness be Ephe. ^ once named amo^g you. For this ye
know that no whoremonger or unclean person hath inheritance in the kingdom of
christ and of god.

This is the will of god that ye abstain 1. These. ^ from whoredom. For god
hath not called vs unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Keep thy self pure and honest.

Avoid the lusts of youth, but follow righteousness, faith, love, and peace,
with them that call on the Lord with a pure hart.

Wedlock is honourable among all me^: ^eb. 13 and the bed undefiled, but
whoremongers and adulterers god will condemn.

Whoremongers shall have their part ^poc. 21. in the lake that burns with fire
and brim stone, which is the second death.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Whoredom was the occasion that Herodias ^ath. 14. Harrods whore sought so
diligently the death of godly Iohn Baptist, which reproved them of their
abominable living.

Thorough whoredom and keeping of ^ke. 15 riotous company the prodigal son was
ted away his goods, and fell unto such necessity, beggary and misery, that he
was glad to keep swine, and would fine have filled his belly with the goddess
that the swine did eat, but he could not be suffered

Learn of this history what the end of whoredom is.

Saint Paule did excommunicate that Cor. 5 man of Corinth, which ungodly kept
his fathers wife. and would not suffer that any of the faithful should keep him
company, nor yet eat or drink with him.

The end of the whore of Babilon is Apo. 18. described of Saint Iohn to be
wonderful wretched, miserable and damnable.

Against Covetousness.
If the devil and the world move thee not to bee content with that is
sufficient and enough, but inordinately add immeasurably to scrat together the
goods of the world, to oppress the pore* to join house to house, land to land,
lordship to lordship, andc. to take great incommes, to raise the rentes, and to
get that may be gotten by right or by wrong, defend thy self against them with
these holy scriptures that follow ever remembering that thou art but a stranger
and a pilgrim in this world, and that thou must go hence, either unto glory or
unto pain, yea and that* how soon thou know not.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
TThou shalt not covet thy neighbours Exo. 20 goods.

Ye shall not trouble, hurt, nor annoy no Exo. 22 widow nor fatherless child.

If ye shall hurt them, and they cry unto me, I will surely hear t^eir cry, and
the^ will my wrath wax what: and I will kill you with the swore, and your wives
shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

Thou shalt take no gifts, for gifts Exod. ^ blind the wise, and pervert the
words of the righteous.

Thou shalt not do thy neighbour wrong ^eu. 12. neither violently oppress him.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in mete yard, in weighte or in
measure. True balances, true weights, a true Epha and a true Hen, shall ye
have.

Fire shall consume the houses of such ^ob. 15 as are greedy to receive gifts.

He heaps up treasure and yet know Psal. 39 eth not he for whom he gathered it.

O trust not in wrong and robbery, Psal. 42 give not your selves unto vanities*
and if retches increase, set not your heart upon them.

Incline my har^ (O Lord) to thy testimonies Psalm. 119 and not to
covetousness.

Who hordeth up his corn shall be cursed Pro. 11 among the people, but blessing
shall light upon his head that gives food.

He that trusts in his riches, shall have a fall, but the righteous shall
flourish as ye greene leaf.

Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great and innumerable
treasures otherwise. He goes about to destroy his own house, that gives his
mind to covetousness but who so hates reward shall live.

Better it is to have a little with righteousness, Pro. 16 then great rentes
wrongfully gotten.

He that hates covetousness shall live Pro. 18 long.

A man that is suddenly rich, envies other, and considered not that poverty
shall come upon him.

Who so robs his father and saith it is no sin, y^ same is like unto a
mans^ear.

O Lord give me neither poverty nor Pro. 30 riches: only grant me a necessary
living.

He that loves money, will never be satisfied Eccle. 5 with money, and who so
delights in riches, shall have no profit thereof.

Where as much riches is, there are ma ny also that spend them away. And what
pleasure more has hee possessed then saving that he may look upon them with his
eyes.

A labouring man sleeps sweetly, whether it be little or much that he eats, but
the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

There is a sore plague, which I have scene under the son, namely riches kept
to the hurt of him that hath them in possession. For oftimes they perish with
his great misery and trouble, and if he have a child it gets nothing.

Read forth the Chapiter.

Let not thine hand be stretched out Eccle. 4 to receive, and shut when thou
shouldest give.

Trust not unto thy riches, and say not Eccle. 5 tush, I have enough for my
life. For it shall not help thee in the time of vengeance and temptation.

Trust not in wicked riches, for they shall not help thee in the day of
punishment and wrath.

Nothing is more wicked and ungracious Eccle. 11 then a covetous man.

He that with all his carefulness heaps Eccle, 14 together vnrightuously
gathered for other folks, and another man shall make good chere with his goods.

A covetous mans eye, hath never enough in the portion of wickedness until the
time that he wither away, and hath lost his own soul.

The riches of the proud shall be rooted Eccle. 21 out.

He that loves retches, shall not ^e justified. Eccle. 31

Many one is come in great misfortune by the reason of gold, and have found
their destruction before them. It is a tree of falling unto them. It is a tree
of passage un to them that offer it up, and al such as be foolish, fall
therein.

Blessed is the rich, which is found without blemish, and hath not gone after
gold, nor heaped in money and treasures, where is there such a one: and we
shall com mend him and call him blessed? For great things doth he among his
people. Essay. 5

Wo be unto you, that join house to house, and coopl^ land to land even so lo^g
as any can be gotten. Shall ye alone dwell upon the earth? These things are in
the ears of the Lord of hostess andc.

Wo bee unto them that give sentence with the ungodly for rewards and condemn
the just cause of the righteous.

Wo be unto thee that spoylest, for thou Essay. 33 also shalt be spoiled.

Wo be unto him that heaps up other men goods. Howe long will he lade himself
with thick clay?

O howe suddenly will they stand up, that Abac. ^ bite and awake, that shall
tear thee in pieces? yea thou shalt be their pray.

Wo be unto him, that covetously gathe reth evil gotten goods into his house,
that he may set his nest on hye, to escape from the power of misfortune Thou
haste devised the shame of thine own house, so that the very stones of the wall
shall cry out of it, and the timber that lies betwixt the joints of the
building, shall answer.

Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver the^ in the day of
the Lords wrath.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Balaam for luc^es sake would have cur Number. 12 sed the people of Israel
contrary to his own conscience, but he was reproved of the Angel of the Lord,
so that his cursing was turned into blessing.

Acham by the commandment of God Iosue. 7 was stoned to death, because ^e toke
of the excommunicate goods.

Saul for the covetousness of the praylost 1. Reg. 13. his kingdom.

The covetousness of Naball and his churlishness ^. Reg. 35 showed unto Dauid,
had almost caused that Naball and all that ever hee had, had been utterly
destroyed, if Abigail his wife had not pacified the matter. Notwithstanding God
shortly punished him with death so that he was taken away fro^ all that ever he
had.

The covetousness of Achab and Iesabel 3. Reg. ^ was the occasion that the good
Nabothe was stoned unto death, against all equity and right, that by this means
they might have his vineyard. But howe miserable their end was for that their
abominable murder, the holy stories do declare.

Gehesy was stricken with leprosy, because 4. Reg. 5 he received money of
Naaman.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
BLessed are the poor in spirit for theirs Math. 5 is the kingdom of heaven.

Lay not up treasure for your selves Mat. 6 upon earth, where neither rust nor
mouth doth corrupt, and where thieves break thorough and steal.

But lay up treasures for you in heaue^ where neither rust nor moth doth
corrupt and where thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your
treasure is there will your hart be also.

What doth it prophet a man to win Math. 1^ the whole world, if he loses his
soul? A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

It is more easy for a cable rope to go Mat. 19. thorough the eye of a nedle,
then a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Wo be to you rich men, which have Luke. 6 your comfort.

Take heed and beware of covetousness. Luke. 12 For no mans life stands in the
abou^ dance of things which he possesses.

Thou fool this night will they fetch away thy soul again from thee. Then whose
shall the things be, that thou hast gathered.

Take heed to your selves, lest at any Luke. 21 time your hearts bee overcome
with the cares of this life.

If any that is called a brother, that is 1. Cor. 5 to say a christen man, be
covetous or an ex torcioner, with him eat not.

Neither thieves, neither covetous per 1. Cor. 6 sons, nether extorcioners,
shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Let not covetousness be once named among Ephe. 5 you. For no covetous parso^,
which is a worshipper of Idols, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ
and God. Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with such as GOD sends.
For we brought nothing into the world, neither shall we cary any thing out.

When we have foot and raiment, let vs therwt be content, they that will be
rich fall into temptation and snares and into many foolish and noisome lusts
which drown men in temptation and destructio^ For covetousness is the root of
all evil, which while some lusted after they erred from the faith, and tangled
them selves with many sorrows. But thou which art the man of god, flee such
things. Follow righteousness, godliness, love, patience, and mekenes.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, and bee content with that ye
have already. For God verily hath said, I will not fail thee, nor yet forsake
thee.

Examples out of the new Testament.
ACertaine rich and covetous person, Luc. 21. made great prouisio^ for many
years that he might live pleasantly and welthely, but shortly after God took
away his life, so that he died.

The rich and unmerciful glotton that Luke. 1^ fared daintily every day, and
was gorgeously apparaled, died and was buried in Hell.

Iudas for lucre of money, sold and betrayed his moister christ to the bishops
Scribes and Pharises. Afterword he hanging up him self, burst a sunder in the
midst and al his bowels gushed out.

Ananias and Saphira were punished Act. 5 with soden death, because of a
covetous mind, they kept away part of the money which they received for the
possession that they had sold.

Against rebellion and disobedience.
IF the devil that old enemy of mankind and troubler of all good orders go
about to put in thy head, that the magistrates and hye powers do not their duty
in the right government of a co^mon weal, but to much cruelly oppress thyre
subjects and that therefore thou moist justly rise and rebel against them, and
take upon thee of thine own private authority to redress things that are amiss
in the commone w eale take heed that thou by no means consent to his most
subtle and wicked temptations, whereby he goes about to throw thee into
everlasting dampnation both of body and soul, beside the shameful death, that
thou shalt have in this world, and the loss of all that ever thou hast, but
content thy self with thy vocation* labour diligently and quietly for thy
^uing, study to maintain peace, pray for the high powers, th^k that cross to be
laid upon the^ for thy distress, ame^d thy life, humbly lame^t thy cause to God
which will not leave thee succour^s, and defend thy self against Satan, and al
his crafty suggestions, with these scriptures following.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
THou shalt be over my house, and accor Ge. 4. ding to thy word shall al my
people be ruled.

Thou shalt do what soever they say unto Deuteronomy. 17 thee that ^e rulers
over the place, which the Lord hath chosen.

Al that thou hast commanded vs, said Iosue* ^* the people to Iosue, we will do
and whether so ever thou sendst vs we will go.

Who so ever he be, saith God, that doth disobey thy mouth, and will not hear
ken unto thy words, in al that thou co^maundeste him, let him dye.

The Lord hath heard your murmurings Exod. 16 saith Moyses, which ye murmur
against him. For what are we? (he speaks of him self and of Aaron) your
murmurings are not against vs, but against the Lord.

They have not caste thee away, but 1. Reg. 81* me ( said God to Samuel) that I
should not reign over them.

Behold to obey is better then sacrifice 1. Reg. 15 and to harken is better
then the fat of ram mes. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbernes is as the wickedness of idolatry.

By me, kings reign, by me Princes rou. 8. make just laws. By me Lords bear
rule, and al Judges of the earth exercise judgment.

Where no ruler is, there the people decay, rou. 12 but where as many are that
can give counsel, there is wealth.

The kings displeasure is a messenger to. 16 of death, but a wise man will
pacify him. The chereful countenance of the king, is life, and his loving
favour is as the eve ning dew

The king ought to be feared as the roaring to. 20 of a Lion. Who so provokes
him un to anger, offends against his own soul. My son fear thou the Lord and
the king, and keep no company withthem that slide back from his fear. For their
destruction shall comsodenly. And who knows the adversity that may come from
the^ both.

Wish the king no euel in thy thought, Eccle. 10 and speak no hurt of the noble
man in thy privy chamber.

For a bird of the ayre shall betraye thy voice, and with her feathers shall
she bewray thee.

Whosoever will not fulfil the law of 1. Esdr. 7 God. and the kings law, let
him have his judgment without delay, whether it be un to death or to be rooted
out, or be condemned in goods, or to be put into prison.

The king is ruler over sea and land 3. Esdr. 4. and has dominion of all
things, and loke what he commands is done. The common people* and the rulers
are obedient unto him.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
GOd did strike Miriam with most grievous Number. 12 and horrible leprosy,
because she murmured against her lawful magistrate Moyses.

God plagued the Israelites for murmuring Number. 21 against his servant
Moyses, with stinging serpents which story them unto death.

Corath, Dathan, and Abiron, because Number. 16 they did not obeye Moyses Gods
magistrate, but disdained that he should reign over them, although appointed of
God, were swalowed up of the earth, both they, their wives, their children, and
all their goods. They went down alive unto ^el, and the earth closed upon them,
and they perished from among the congregation.

Absolon king Daulds son made an Reg. 15 insurrection against his Father, and
thorough the counsel of wicked Achitophel, wrought most villainy against his
fathers honour. What followed? Was not Absolon miserably slain? Did not his
untrusty counselor hang him self, were there not also xx. M. men slain in
battle, that took Absalons part.

Seba the son of Bechey had his he^d cut of, because he conspired against king
^. Reg. 22. Dauid, and dissuaded the people from du^ obedience to their liege
sovereign Lord.

Baasa the son of Aby conspired a ^. Reg. 15. against Nadab king of Israel,
slew him, and reigned in his stead. But in hat folowed^ though Baasa in the
sight of the world die ed no shameful death, yet died he in the dis pleasure of
God, and afterword all his succession with all his friends and kinsfolks were
al destroyed, so that there was not one left alive.

Zimry conspired against Ela king of Israel, 3. Reg. 15. slew him and reigned
in his stead. But shortly after he was driven to such misery and straits that
he fled into the kings palace at Thirza, and settng it on a fire brent himself,
and so wretchedly ended his life.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Let every soul submit himself unto y^ Rome. 13 authority of the higher power
For there is no power but of God. Thepowers that be are ordained of God. Who
soever therefore resysteth the power, resisted the ordi nonce of God, but they
that resist shall get to themselves dampnacion. For rulers are not fearful to
them that doo good, but to them that do evil. Wilt thou be without fear of the
power. Doo well then and so shalt thou be praised of the same. For hee is the
minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou donst that which is evil, then
fear. For hee bears not the sword for nought. For he is the minister of god to
take vengeance on him that doth evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey not only for
fear of vengeance, but also because of conscience. And even for this cause paye
ye tribute. For they are Gods ministers, serving for the same purpose. Give to
every man therefore his duty tribute ^o who^ tribute belonged, custom to whom
custom is due, fear to whom fear belonged, honour to whom honour pertains.

I exhort that aboue all things prayers, Tim. 2 supplications, intercessions
and giving of thanks be had for all men, for kings and for all that are in
authority, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life, withal godliness and
honesty. For that is good and accepted in the sight of god our Saviour, which
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.

Warn them, that they submit them ^it. 3. selves to rule and power, that they
obey the Magistrates, that they be ready to doo every good work, that they
speak evil of no man, that they be no fighters, but gentle, showing all
meekness unto all men.

Submit your elves unto all manner ordinance Pet. 3 of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the king as unto the chief head, either unto rulers as unto
them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil dooers, but for the praise
of them that doo well. For so is the will of god, that with well doing ye may
stop the mouths of foolish and ignorant men, as free, and not as having the
liherty for a cloak of malyciousnesse, but even as the sernauntes of God.

Honour all men, love brotherly fellow ship, fear god, honour the king.

Wicked are they and damned shall they 2. Pet. ^ be, that despise authority,
and ^eare not to speak evil of them that excel in honour.

Examples out of the new Testament.
MAry Christ's mother and Ioseph Luck. 2. her husband, obeyed the Emperors
commandment, and went into their city Bethelem to be taxed.

Christ payed tribute to Caesar both for Math. 1 him self and for his
disciples, and willed o there so to do.

Christ even unto the death obeyed the Math. ^ temporal rulers.

The Apostles of Christ were obedient to the higher* powers and taught other so
to be.

Saint Paule willingly obeyed the public Magistrates, Felix and Festus. andc

Theudas and Iudas of Galile were two sedicious persons. The one boasted to doo
great things and so allured much people to follow him, the other counselled the
Jaws by no means to pay tribute to Caesar, but to maintain their old liber
ties, and by this means moved great sedition among the people.

What became of them, were they not put to death, and so many as followed th^
either slain or else scattered abroad, and so brought to nought. We read not in
all the holy scriptures that any traitor or notable sedicious person hath at
any time ^scaped without notable and famous punishment. God can not suffer his
magistrates to be disobeyed, his co^mon weals to be disturbed his polytyqne or
cyuyl^ laws to be conte^ned his godly and honest orders to be broken. Whosoever
attempts any such wickedness, God will be a uenged of him, as it is evident not
only in the holy Scriptures, but also in profane histories.

Against malice, grudge, envy, hatred and anger.
IF thou be tempted of Satan to break the order of charity, and to malice thy
christen brother* set these scriptures before the eyes of thy mind.

Sentences out of the old Testament
Thou shalt not hate thy brother inthine Leuit. 19. hart, but shalt in any wise
rebuke thy neighbour that thou bear not sin no for his sake.

Thou shalt not avenge thy self nor be mindful of wrong, against the children
of my people, but shalt love thy neighbours even as thy self. Pro. 25

If thine enemy honger, fed him, if he thirst, give him drink, for so shalt
thou heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee.

He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance Eccle. 2^ of the lord, which
shall suerly keep him in his sins.

Forgive thy neighbour the hurt that he hath don the, and so shall thy sins be
forge uen to thee also when thou pray. A man that bears hatred agai^st a^other,
how dare ^e destre forgiveness of god? He that show ^th no mercy to a man which
is like him self, howe dare he ask forgiveness of his sins. If he that is but
flesh bears hatred and keep it, who will entreat for his sins? Remember thy
end, and let enmity pass.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Samuel prayed for king Saul, 1. Reg. 15. although a wicked man an enemy to
gods servant, a^d altogether disobedient to the will of God.

Moyses prayed for the stubborn and un Exod. 22. faithful Jaws, which not
withstanding rebelled against him, and would have slain him.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament. Math. 5
Lou^ your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do good to them that hate you.
Pray for them which do you wrong and pursue you, that ye may be the children of
your father that is in heaven. Mat. 7

Whatsoever ye will, that men should do to you: even so do you to them. That is
the law and the prophets. Math. 19

Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self. Luke. 9

Be merciful as your father is merciful. Judge not, and you shall not be
judged. Co^ damn not, and you shall not be condemned Forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven. Give, and it shall be given to you, good measure pressed down, shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your b^somes* For with the same
measure ye meet, with the same shall other meet to you again.

A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love together as I loved you, Iohn.
13 that even so you love one an other.

By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye shall have love one
to another.

Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to 1.
Cor. 13^ be brent, yet if I have no love, it profits me nothing at all.

Brethren if any ma^ be fallen by chance Gal. 6 into any fault, ye which are
spiritual, help to amend him in the spirit of mekenes, considering thy self,
least thou also be attempted.

Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfil ye the law of Christ.

Let not the sun go down upon your wrath. Ephes. 4

Be gentle one to another, merciful forgiving one another, even as GOD for
Christ's sake, hath forgiven you.

Let every man be slow unto anger. For ^acob. 1 the wrath of man works not that
which is righteous before God.

Aboue all things have fervent love among 1* Pet. 4 you. For love shall cover
the multitude of sins.

If any man say, I love God, and hates 1, Iohn. 4 his brother, he is a liar.
For he that lo ueth not his brother whom he hath seen god whom he has not seen
how can he love. And this commandment have we of him, that he that loves god,
should al so love his neighbour.

He that loves not his brother, a^ideth 1. Iohn. 3. in death. Whosoever hates
his brother is a murderer. And ye know that no murthe rer has everlasting life
abiding in him* My babes let vs not love in word nor in tongue, but in work and
truth.

Examples out of the new^ Testament. Luke. 23
Christ so dearly loved vs, yea and that when we^ were yet his enemies, that
hee gave him self even unto the death for our sake. Yea he hanging on the cross
prayed for his very^ enemies, unto his heauenly^ Father.

Blessed Stephen in the midst of his Act. 7 torments prayed for his enemies.

S. Paule wished him self to be cursed Rome. 9. from Christ^, so that his
kinsmen might^ be saved.

Against the bitter storms of persecution of Gods word.
IF at a^y time thorough the frailty of nature thou be troubled in thy mind
when the cross ^f persecution is laid upon thee for the word of God. look that
thou shrink not back from the truth nor discourage thy self. but think thy self
blessed of G^d, call these scriptures that follow unto rei membrance for thy
comfort.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
THe Lord kills and geeueth life again^, 1. Reg. ^ hee brings even to Hell and
back again.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears Psal. 34. them, and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a troubled heart, and will save such as
be of an humble spirit.

Great are the troubles of the righteous but the Lord delivers him out of the^
all

He kepeth all his bones, so that not one of them is broken.

But misfortune shall flea the ungodly, and they that hate the righteous shall
be desolate.

The Lord delivers the souls of his servants, and all they that put their trust
in him, shall not be comfortless.

For thy sake O Lord are we killed all Psal. 44 the day long, and are counted
as sheep ap pointed to be slain.

Up Lord, why sleep thou, awake and be not absent from vs for ever.

Wherefore hide thou thy face, and for get our misery and trouble? For our soul
is brought low even unto the dust, our belly cleaves unto the ground. Arise and
help vs, and deliver vs for thy mercies sake.

Thou O god hast proved vs, thou also Psalm. 66 hast tried vs like as silver is
tried. Thou brought vs into the snare, and laydest trouble upon our loins. Thou
suffredest men to ride over our heads, we went thorough fire and water, and
thou brought vs out into a comfortable place.

I believed and therefore have I spoken Psal. 115 but I was sore troubled.

Right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his saints.

The way of the righteous is judged to Eccle. 2 be utter destruction, but they
are in rest. Although they suffer pain before men, yet is their hope full of
immortality. They are punished but in few things, nevertheless in many things
shall they be well rewarded.

For God proves them and finds the^ mete for him self, yea as the gold in the
furnace doth ^e try them, and receives them as a burnt offering, and when ye
time comes, they shall be looked upon. Sapient. 3

My son, if thou wilt come into the service of god, stand fast in righteousness
and fear, and arm thy soul to temptation. Setle thine heart, and be patient,
^ow down thine ear, receive the words of vndersta^ding, and shrink not away
when thou art enticed. Hold thee fast upon god, join thy self unto him, and
suffer that thy life may increase at the last.

Whatsoever happens unto thee, receive it, suffer in heaviness, and be pacie^t
in thy trouble. For like as gold and silver are tried in fire, even so are
acceptable me^ in the fornace of adversity. Believe in God, and he shall help
thee.

For righteousness take payne with all thy soul, and for the truth strive thou
unto death and God shall fight for thee against thy enemies.

Examples out of the old Testament. Ge. 4.
Abel was cruelly slain of his brother Caine, whom he never offended. Gen. 39.

Ioseph was cast into prison, because he would not lean to the fy^thy request
of his lords wife.

Moses, Aaron, and the Israelites were Exod. 14. grievously entreated and
persecuted of King Pharao.

Saule with great diligence sought to destroy Dauid. ^. Reg. 18

Queen Iezabel pursued the Prophet 3. Reg. 19. Helias.

Zachary the son of Barachias was ^. Pare. 2. stoned to death for telling the
king truth.

Achymeleche with certain other holy ^. Reg. 22 men of god, was slain at king
Saules commandment because he showed kind nes to Dauid the hearty beloved
servant of God.

Sydrac, Mesas and Abdenago were cast Dan. 3. into a firye fornace, because
they wouldnot worship the golden Image, that king Nabuchodonosor had made, but
only the God of Israel.

Daniel was cast into the den of Lions, because Dan. 6. that contrary to king
Darius commandment he had prayed unto his Lord God, the God of Israel.

At an other time also he was caste into Dan. 14. the den of Lions, because he
said, that Bell and the Dragon were no Gods.

The virtuous and chaste woman Susan Dan. 13. was at the point to be stoned
unto death, because she would not break the commandment of god, and consent to
the un lawful and filthy requests of the two Elders.

Eleazarus was miserably put to death, 2. Mac. ^ because at the kings
commandment he would not eat swines flesh, contrary to the law of god.

A certain woman also with her. vii. 2. Math. 7. sons were with most extreme
cruelty put to death, because they would not obey the wicked precept of the
most wicked king.

The prophets were unmercifully slain because they rebuked sin, and taught^ the
will of God.

The most excellent Prophet Essay, for his liberty of speech in re^uking the
sins of the princes and of the people and prophe^iyng of Gods vengeance to fall
vpo^ the country and people, was cut in two parts asunder with a saw, and
buried un der an Ok.

Ieremy after much enprisonment was stoned onto death of his people at Taphu as
in Egipc^, because he warned them of their wicked living, and exhorted them un
to repentance.

Amos at the commandment of king Amasses for his preaching was cruelly bea^en
and grievously formented. At the last Ochozias son of Amasias caused him to be
thurste into the temples with a great nail, and being half dead he was carried
into his own country, where he soon after died.

Micheas was buffeted imprisoned and fed with bread and water.

Examples out of the old Testament.
BLessed are they that suffer persecution Mathe. 5. for righteousness for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are ye when men revile you and perse^ute you, and ^ speak all eu^l
sayings against you for my sake:

Rejoice and be merry, for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted
they the Prophets before you.

The scholar is not aboue the moister, nor Math. 10 the servant aboue his Lord.
If they have called the Father of the household Beelzebub, how much more shall
they so cal them that are of his household.

Be not afraid of them that ^il the body, but rather fear him which is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell fire.

Every one that shall confess me before men, I shall confess him also before my
fa there which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, I shall
also deny him befyre my Father that is in heaven. Math. 24

Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake Mark. 8

Whosoever will follow me let him forsake him self and take up his cross and
follow me. For whosoever will save hislife shall lose it. But whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake and the gospels the same shall save it. For what
shall it profit a man, if he win all the world and and lose his own soul, or
what shall a man give to rede^ his soul wtal agai^: whosoever fore shall be
ashamed of me and my words in this whorish and sinful generation, of him also
shall the son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with
the holy angels.

The servant is not greater the^ his Lord. ^ohn. 16 If they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you.

If the world hate you, know ye, that it hated me before you: If ye were of the
world, the world wold love that is his. But forasmuch as ye are not of the
world but I have chose^ you out of the world therefore doth the world hate you.

The time shall come, that who so ever ^ohn. 16 kills you, will think that he
doth God service.

Ye shall lame^t and weep, but the world shall rejoice.

In the world ye shall have trouble, but be on a good comfort, I have overcome
the world.

If we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified together with him.

I suppose that the afflictions of this Rome. 8. life, are not worthy of the
glory which shall be showed upon vs.

Blessed be God the father of our Lord 1. Cor. 1. Iesus Christ, which is the
father of ^ and the God of al comfort, which comfort vs in all our
tribulations.

As the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in vs: even so is our consolation
pleuteous by Christ.

We are not wearied, but though our out ward man perish: yet the in ward man is
2. Cor. ^ renewed day by day. For our trouble which is short and light,
prepares an exceeding and an eternal weight of glory unto vs: while we loke not
on the things which are scene, but on the things which are not scene: For
things which are seen, are temporal, but things which are not scene are
everlasting.

We know, that if our earthly mansion 2. Cor. ^ of this dwelling were
destroyed, we have a building of God, an habitatio^ not made with hands, but
everlasting in heaven.

Unto you it is given, not only to believe Phil. 1. in Christ, but also to
suffer for his sake.

Suffer affliction as a good soldier of 2. Tim. ^ Christ.

If we die with Christ we shall live with 2. Tim. ^ him. If we suffer we him,
we also shalreig^ with him: if we deny him, he will also dny vs.

All that will live godly in Christ Iesu, shall suffer persecutions.

This is thank woorthy^ if a man for conscience toward god, endure grefe and
suffer wrong vndescrued.

If when ye do well ye suffer wrong and take it patiently, then is there thanks
with God, For here unto verily were ye called.

Blessed are ye if any trouble happen un Pet. 3. to you for righteousness sake.

Dearly beloved marvel not that ye are Pet. 4. proved by fire (which thing is
to try you) as though some strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, in as
much as ye are partakers of Christ's passion, that when his glory appears, ye
may, be merry and glad. If ye be railed upon, for the name of Christ, happy are
ye. For the glory and the spirit of God, rests upon you. On their part, he was
evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.

If any man suffer as a christian man, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify god in this behalf.

Let them that be trooubled according to he will of god, commit their saules to
him with well doing, as unto a faithful creator. Hob. 13.

Iesus to sa^ctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.
Let vs go forth therefore out of the tents, and suf fer rebuke with him. For
here have we no continuing city, but we seek on to come.

By many tribulations must we enter Act. 14. into the kingdom of heaven.

The holy ghost witnesses in every city Ac. 20. saying, that bands and trouble
abide me. But none of these things move me, neither is my life dear unto my
self, that I might fulfil my course with joy, and the ministration of the word
with I have received of the Lord Iesu to testify the Gospel of the grace of
God.

I am ready not to be bound only, but Act. 21. also to die for the name of the
Lord Iesu.

Blessed are the dead that dye in the Apoc. 1^ Lord, even so saith the spirit,
that from henceforth they rest from their labours. But their work follow them.

Examples out of the new Testamen.
IOhn Baptist for truth telling to king Math. 1^ Herod, was cast into priso^
and beheaded.

Iesus Christ our Lord and saviour after Math. 2^ many blasphemies rebukes,
slanders and bitter torments suffered the most spiteful death of the cross, and
so entered into glory.

The holy marter S. Stephen, was stoned Act. 7. unto death.

Iames y^ brother of Iohn was beheaded. Act. 12.

What kindness Peter and Paule with the apostles found at the hands of them
whose saluatio^ they most dilige^tly sought, the histories make mention.
Neither I hear speak of those blessed Mortars, which sense their days have dyed
for the confession of gods truth, so that the gospel is not without a cause
called of blessed Paul the word of the cross.

For all that will live godly in Christ Ie Cor. 1* su saith he, shall suffer
persecution.

I saw saith Saint Iohn under the altar, ^poc. 6. the souls of them that were
killed for the word of god, and for the testimony^ which they had, and they
cried with a loud voice, saying: how lunge tariest thou O Lord, holy and true,
to judge and to revenge our blood on them that be on the earth? And long white
garments were g^ uen unto every one of them. And it was said unto them, that
they should rest a little season, till the number of their fellows and brethren
and of them that should be killed as they were fulfilled.

Against the temptation which the faithful have, when they compare their
miseries and wretchedness with the wealth, prosperity* and pleasures of the
swinish Epicures and wicked worldlings. Where thou also shalt see the misery
ble end of the un godly.
IF Satan our old adversary with his handemaide, the flesh shall at any time
move thee to forsake God and his holy word* by considering the flourishing and
triumphant estate of the wicked worldlings, and the to much miserable and base
trade of the Lords servants and professors of gods truth, which live in all
kind of misery. wretchedness and poverty, and are piteously oppressed of the
tyrants of this world, when on the contrary part the ungodly have all things at
their own pleasure, and live at their hearts ease without disturbance for lack
of temporal things: consent no^ to his subtle assaults* but manfully resist
them, co^sidering with thy self, that though the ungodly reign in tic world,
and have the uppermost hand yet shall their end be miserable when the poor
afflicted for Gods cause shall altar their manifold temptations be rewarded
with perpetual joy, and everlasting glory. and that thou may be the more
assuredly persuaded in these things* call to remembrance these holy scriptures
following.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
Know thou not this, that from the Iob. 15. beginning ever since the creation
of man upon earth, the praise of the ungodly hath been short, and that the joy
of the hipocrites hath continued, but the twinck ling of an ey? Though he be
magnified up to the heaven, so that his head reaches unto the clouds, yet he
perishes at the last like dong: in so much that they which have seen him shall
say, where is he? He vanissheth as a dream, so that he can no more be found,
and passes away in a vision in the night, so that the eye which saw him before,
gets now no sight of him and his place knows him no more.

Wherefore do the wicked men live in Iob. ^1. health and prosperity, come to
their old age, and increase in riches.

Their Childers children live in their sight, and their generation before their
eyes. Their houses are safe from all fear for the rod of god doothe not smite
them. Their bullock gendreth, and that not out of time, their cow calueth, and
is not vnfruteful. They send their children forth bi flocks, and their sons
lead the dance. They bear with them tabrets and harps and have instruments of
music at their pleasure. They spend their days in welthynesse but suddenly they
go down to Hell.

O Lord thou art more righteous then Iere. 1^ that I should dispute with thee.
Nevertheless let me talk with thee in things reasonable. How happens it, that
the way of the ungodly is so prosperous, and that it goes so well with them
which without any shame offend and live in wickedness. Thou plant them, they
take root, they grow and bring forth fruit. They boste much of thee, yet art
thou far from their rains. But thou Lord to who^ I am well known thou that hast
scene and proved my heart, take them away like as a flock is carried to the
slaughter house, and appoint them for the day of slaughter.

O Lord, how long shall I cry and thou wilt not hear? how long shall I
co^plaine Psalm. 73. unto thee, suffering wrong and thou wilt not help: why
latest thou me se werinesse and labour: Tyranny and violence are before me,
power over goes right, for the law is torn in pieces, and there can no right
judgment go forth. And why, the ungodly is more set by then the righteous This
is the cause that wrong judgment proceeded. Thine eyes O Lord, are clean: thou
may not see evil, thou can not be hold the thing that is wicked. Wherefore then
dost thou look upon the ungodly, and hold thy tong when the wicked devours the
man that is better then himself. Thou make men as the fish of the sea, and like
as the creeping beasts that have no guide, they take up al with their angle,
they catch it in their net, and do sacrifice un to their yarn, because that
thorough it their portion is become so fat, and their meat so plenteous.
Wherefore, they cast out their net again and never cease to slay the people.

Like as the wine deceives the dronkard, Abac. 1. even so the proud shall fall
and not endure.

Full miserable, is the death of ungodly, Psal. 34. for they that hate the
unrighteous shall be plucked up by the root.

Fret not thy self at the ungodly, be not Psal. 37. thou envious against the
evil doers. For they shall soon be cute down like the grass and be withered
even as the grene herb. Grieve not thy self at one y^ is in prosperity and
lives in abhominacion. Leave of fro^ wrath, let god displeasure, let not thy
gelousy move thee also to do evil, For wicked doers shall bee rooted out, but
they that patiently abide the lord shall inherit the land. Suffer yet a little
while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone, thou shalt loke after his place and
he shall be away.

Read forth the Psalm^ and mark it well.

Wherefore thus arrogantly magnify thou thy self at all time. O mischievous
giant, wherefore enforces thy tongue mis chief, fordgyng disceat like a new set
Razor. Wherefore love thou malice rather then honesty, rather to lye then to
say truth. For thou delight in all manner of pernicious speech, oh thou
desceitful tong. Wherefore, god shall utterly rend thee up by the roots and
destroy thee, and he shall throw thee down out of thy tabernacle, and pluck thy
roots out of the land of the living.

Rede diligently and mark well the. 73. Psalm which altogether belonged unto
this matter.

Wo be to the proud wealthy in Zion, Amo^. ^* even to such as think them selves
so s^re upon the mount of Samarya which hold them selves for the best of the
world, and rule the house of Israel at their own pleasure. Ye are taken out for
the evil day, even ye that sit in the stool of wilfulness: ye that lie upon
beds of Ivory and use your wantonness upon your couches, ye that eat the best
Lambs of the flock, and the fattest calves of the drouy, ye that sing to the
lute, and in playing of instruments compare your selves unto Dauid, ye that
drink wine out of goblets, and anoint your selves with the best oil, but no man
is sorry for Ioseph hurt, therefore shall ye now be the first of them that
shall be led away captive, and the lusty ^heare of the wilful shall come to an
end.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
CAine the figure of all wicked and blou Gene. 4. die Tyrants, slew his brother
Abel, and while he lived he was a runagate, and a vagabond having an unquiet
conscience and now being dead he is a dampned soul in Hell.

The Tyrants and mighty Giants Gen. 6. 7. with all the world besides 8. persons
were drowned, after they had lived long in plea sure and in all the filthy
desires of the wic ked flesh without repentance.

The filthy Sodomites lived in all kind Gen. 19. of voluptuous abhominacion,
the conclusion was that they were consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven.

Pharao handled the people of God very Exod. 14. cruelly intending utterly to
destroy the^ all, but the end was, that both he and all his army were drowned
in the sea, and the people of Israel harmless preserved.

Sisar and Abimelech being grievous Iud. 4. enemies of gods people, were slain
of wo men.

Holophernes for all his proud looks en tending to destroy the Israelits, was
slain him self of a woman.

Saule persecuted Dauid the servant of 1. Reg. 3^ God, intending to slay him,
but Dauid escaped, and Saule was slain with the sword

Achitophel remembering what wicked 2. Reg. 17 council he had genen Absalon
against his Father Dauid, and perceiving that it wold not come to pass so
mighty is God to destroy the wicked councels of the ungodly he went home and
hanged him self.

^bsolon pursuing and sicking his Fathers 2. Reg. 18* death, in the midst of
his fury was hanged, by the hear of his head on a tree, and so dyed. 3. Reg. 2.

Ioab was slain, because he killed two good men, even Abner and Amasa.

The house of Hieroboam because hee 3. Reg. 15. made Israel to sin, was
destroyed by the sword of Baasa king of Israel.

Queen Iesabel that great enemy to the 4. Reg. 9. servants and Prophets of the
Lord, was thrown down headlong out of an high window, and trodden down with
horses feet, and at the last devoured and eaten up of dogs. Iehu slew the house
of Achab for the Prophets that were slain. ^. Par. 24

King Ioas was slain of his own servants, because he slew Zachary the so^ of
the high Priest Ioiada, without a cause. 4. Reg. 25

The wicked king Sedechias, which so cruelly handled the Prophet Ieremy: had
both his eyes put out, and being fettered with chains of Iron, he was carried
prison ner into Babilon, where hee miserably died.

Amon that most proud accuser and inuentour Hector. 7. of mischiefs against the
Jaws, preparing a pair of gallows for good Mar docheous that faithful
Israelite, was han general upon them him self.

They that accused Daniell to y^ king Dan. 6. and sought his death, were caste
into the dungeon, and devoured of the Lions.

The ungracious and wicked Judges, Dan 13 which sought the death of that godly
woman Susan, were slain them selves.

Andronicus, which s^ew that good man 1. Match. Onias, was slain him self.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
WO be to you that are rich, that have Luck. 6* therein your consolation. Wo
bee to you that are full, for ye shall honger. Wo be to you that now laugh, for
ye shall wail and weep. Wo bee to you when all men shall praise you, for so did
their fathers to the false Prophets.

Many walk of whom I have told you Phil. 3. often, and now I tel you weeping,
that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ who se end is damnation, whose
God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame which are worldly minded.

Go to now ye rich men, weep and houle one your wretchedness that shall come up
Iacob. ^* on you. Your riches is corrupt, your garments are motheaten, your
gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of the^ shall be a witness unto you
and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. andc.

I heard a voice from heaven sayinge^ Apoc. 17 O my people come away from
Babilon that great whore and mighty, strumpet the mother of the abhominacions
of the whole earth. Come away I say from her, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, that ye receive not of her plages, for her sins are gone up to heaven,
and god hath reme^bred her wickedness* Reward her as she re warded you, and
give her double, accor^dinge to her work. And power in double to her in the
same cup which she filled unto you. And as much as she glorified her self and
lived wantonly, so much pour ye in for her of punishment and sorrow. For she
said in her self, I sit being a Queen and am no widow and shall see no sorrow.
Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death and sorrow and hunger, and
shall be brent with fire. For strong is the Lord god which judges her.

Examples out of the new Testament
The rich and proud glutton which was ^uke. 1^ gorgeously apparelled, and fared
daintily every day, and yet would have no pity on the poor Lazare, dyed and was
carried in to hell.

Iudas that betrayed Christ, hanged him Ass. 1* self.

Herode which greatly vexed the congregation Act. 1^* of Christ, and slew Iames
the brother of Iohn: even in the midst of his pomp and glory, was smitten down
of the Lords angel and was eate^ with worms, and so miserably perished.

Elimas the sorcerer and false Prophet Act. 13* resisted Paules preaching, but
he therefore was stretght ways stricken blind thorough the mighty power of God.

Against the most horrible and damnable sin, the sin against the holy ghost.
IF the Devil which seeks nothing but thy des^ruction, labour so to harden thy
heart that thou contrary to thy knowledge even of a pretensed and wilful malice
should impugn the truth of Christs gospel, and persecute the same in his
menbers, and so sin against the holy ghost, and blaspheme the Lord thy God unto
the damnation both of thy body and soul, loke that aboue al things in this be
half thou leave not unto his wicked temtations if thou ^enderest thine own
salvation, but rather withal thy power resist him by calling these holy
scriptures unto thy remembrance.

Examples out of the old Testament.
I will put him out of the book that ^od. 33 sins against me.

A man that speaks evil of his God, ^. 33. shall bear his sin, and he that
blasphemes the name of the Lorde^, let him dy^ the death: All the people shall
stone him, whether he be a citizen or a strau^ger: what soever he be that
blasphemes the name of the lord, let him dye the death.

If one man sins against another, ^eg. 2 God may be merciful unto him: but if a
ny manne sin against God, who shall pray for him?

The soul that doth ought presumt^ ^m. 15. ously, whether he be an Israelite or
a strau^ ger, the same blasphemes the lord. And that soul shall be rooted out
from among his people, because he hath despised the word of the Lord, and hath
broken his co^maundemente. That soul therefore shall perish, and his sin shall
be upon him.

They rejoice in doing evil, and delight ^o. ^ in wicked things.

They make boast of their sins them ^ay. 3 selves as the Sodomites did, and
hide the^not. Wo bee unto their souls, for they have rewarded ^ unto
the^selues. Bid the righteous do well, for they shall enjoy y^ fruits of their
study. But wo be unto th^ ungodly and vnrigheeous, for they shall be rewarded
after their works.

Thou shalt not pray for this people, Iere. 7. thou shalt neither give thanks
nor bid prayer for them. Thou shalt make no in tercession to me for them, for
in no wise will I hear thee. Read^ fourth.

This said the lord unto me, thou shalt not I^re. 4^* pray to do this people
good, for though^ they fast, I will not hear their prayers: Though they offer
burnt offerings and sacrifices, yet will not I accept them. For I will destroy
them with the sword and hunger and pestilence.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
THe servants and all the army of the 4. Reg. proud Senacherib, were destroyed
for their blasphemy against god.

Holo^rnes blasphemed God when ^t. 3 he said, that there was none other god of
the earth but Gabuchodonosor, and therefore was he afterword slain even of a
woman.

Nabugodonosor blasphemed god, whe^ he said to the three children, who is the
God that ca^ deliver you out of my hands?

The children of Isarell blasphemed god ^re. 44. and therefore perished, when
they said to the Prophet Ieremy: As for the words that thou haste spoken unto
vs in the name of the lord, we will in no wise hear them: But whatsoever goes
out of our own mouth, that will we doo. We will do sacrifice and offer
oblations unto the queen of heaven, like as we and our forefathers, our kings,
and our rulers have done in the cities of Iuda and in the streets and fields of
Jerusalem. For then had wee plenteousnesse of vitails, then were we in
prosperity and no misfortune came upon vs. But sense we left to offer and to
sacrifice unto the queen of heaven, wee have had scarsnesse of all things, and
perish with sword and honger.

Those Jaws blasphemed God, which ^ach. 1. said, let vs go and make a covenant
with the Heathen that are round about vs. For since we departed from them, we
have had sorrow enough.

Nicanor blasphemed god when he said ^ach. 1^ Is their a mighty one in heaven
that commanded the Saboth day to be kept. It was answered, yea even the living
god, the mighty Lord in heaven, commanded the. vii. day to be kept. Then said
be: and I am mighty upon earth, to command them for to arm themselves, and to
perform the kings business.

Sentences out of the new Testament. Math. 1^*
He that is not with me, is again me, saith Christ. And be that gathered not
with me scatereth abroad. Therefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphe my against the spirit
shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against the son of
man, it shall be forgiven him. But whosoever speaks against the holy ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him neither in this world nor in the world to come.

If any men see his brother sin not unto 1. Ioh. 5^ death, let him ask and he
shall give him life for the^ that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death, for which I say that a ma^ should not pray.

It may not be, that they which were Hob. 6^ once lightened and have tasted of
the heau^nly gift, and were become partakers of the holy ghost and have tasted
of the good word of god, and the powers of the world to come: If they fall away
'that they should again be renewed by repentance which in them selves do
crucify the son of God making a mock of him.

If we sin wilfully after that we have Ieb. 10. received the knowledge of
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for
judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the adversary. He that despises
Moyses law, dies without mercy under two or three wytnesses: How much sorer
suppose ye shall he be punished which treads under foot the Son of God, and
counts the blood of the Testament, wherewith he was sa^ctified, as an unholy
thing, and dishonour to the sprite of grace.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The Jaws spake blasphemy against ^ke. 11. the holy ghost, when they said of
Christ: by the power of Beelzebub doth he cast out Devils.

They were blasphemers which said ^ath. 27. to Christ hanging on the cross,
thou that destroyedst the Temple of GOD and buildest it again in three days,
save thy self. If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross.

They also spake blasphemy against the holy ghost, which now adays of a
pretensed malice condemn the word of God as herey, and persecute the preachers
thereof as heretics and sedicious persons.

Against the despising of Gods word, of the plagues that follow the same.
IF the devil go about to pluck down thy mind from the love of gods word, and
to move thee to despise the doctrine of thy salvation, so that thou shouldest
no more delight in the most comfortable gospel of Christ, which is the power of
god to save so many as believe, but rather in things of vanity, ^ake heed that
thou leanest not to his subtle suggestions, but standing in awe of gods
judgements* and fearing his plagues, valiantly resist Satan with these holy
scriptures following.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament. Leuit. 26
IF ye will not harken unto me says the Lord nor keep my commandments, but
despise them. andc. then will I doo this again unto you. I will set my face
against you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and they that hate you,
shall reign over you. I will make the heaven over you as hardyron, and your
land as hard as bras. I will send my wilde beasts upon you which shall rob you
of your children, and destroy your cattle. I will send a sword up on you that
shall avenge my Testament with you. I will send the pestilence among you. Read
the Chapiter to thend.

If thou wilt not harken to the voice of the Lord thy God to keep and to do all
his Deu. 27. commandments and ordinances, then all these curses shall come upon
thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shalt thou be in the Town, and cursed in the
Field, cursed shall thine almayrye be and thy store. Cur sed shall the fruit of
thine body and the fruit of thy land be, and the fruit of thy oxen, and the
flock of thy sheep. The Lord shall make the pestilence clean to thee, un till
he have consumed thee from the land: The Lord shall smite thee with madness
blindness, and dasing of hart, because thou seruedst not the Lord thy god with
ioyfulnes and with a good hart for the abou^da^cs of all things, wherefore thou
shalt serve thine enemy which the Lord shall send o^ thee in hunger and thirst,
in nakedness, and in need of all things: And he shall put a yoke of iron upon
thy neck until be have brought the to nought. Read this Chapiter dilige^tly
from the beginning to thend.

They have caste away the law of the Lord of hostess, and have blasphemed the
Essay. 5. word of the holy one of Israel. Therefore is the wrath of the Lord
kindled against his people and he shakes his hand at the^, yea he shall smite
so, that the hills shall tre^ble. And their carcasses shall lie in the open
streate.

They have offended the law, changed Essay. 24 the ordinances, and made the
everlasting testament of none effect. And therefore shall the curse devour the
earth, for they that dwell thereon have sinned, wherefore they shall be brent
also, and those that remain shall be very few. The sweet wine shall moorn, the
grapes shall be weak, and all ye have been merry in hart shall sigh.

The mirth of tabrets shall be laid down, the chere of the joyful shall cease,
and the pleasure of the Lutes shall have an end. There shall no more wine be
drunk with ^irth, the beer shall be bitter to them that drink it, the wicked
cities shall be broken down, al houses shall be shut, that no man may come in.

Woe is me saith the Prophet all is Essay. 24 full of sinners which offend of
purpose and malice: And therefore (O thou that duellist upon the earth) there
is at hand for thee fear, pit, and snare. Whosoever escapes the terrible cry,
shall fall into the pit, and if hee come out of the pit he shall bee taken with
the snare, For the windows aboue shall be opened, and the foundation of the
earth shall move: The earth shall give a great croak, it shall have a sore
ruin, and take an horrible fall: The earth shall sticker like a drunken man,
and bee taken away like a tent: Her misdedes shall light so heavy upon her,
that she must fall and never rise up again: Read ^e whole chapter Essay. 30.

These people are obstinate they provoke me unto anger, they are lying childre^
and even such children that will not hear the law of God.

They say to them that see, see nothing: and to the Southsayer, tell of nothing
for to come if it bee either good or honest, but ^ pleasant things unto vs, and
preach vs false things.

Tread out of the way, go out of the path, turn away the holy one of Israel
from vs. Therefore thus saith the holy one of Israel: for as much as ye have
cast away his word, and have comforted your selves with power and nimbleness,
and put your confidence therein: therefore shall ye have this mischief again
for your destruction, and fall like an hye wall that falls because of some rift
or blast, whose breaking comes suddenly. And your destruction shall be like an
earthen pot which breaks, no ma^ touching it, but breaks so sore that a ma^
shall not find a sheu^r of it to fetch fire in, or to take water out of the
pit. For the God, even that holy one of Israel hath pro missed thus. Essay. 44.

Who suffered Iacob to be trodden under foot, and Israel to be spoiled: was it
not the Lord himself, against whom we have sinned? we had no delight to walk in
his ways, neither were we obedient to his laws. Therefore hath he poured upon
vs his wrathful displeasure, and strange battle, which makes vs have to do on
every side, yet will we not understand. He burns vs up, yet it sinks not into
our hearts.

Because they have sorfaken my law Ierem. 9. that I gave them, and have not
harde my voice, nor yet walked thereafter but follow ed the wickedness of their
own hearts, and run after strange gods, as their fathers taught them:

Therefore thus saith the Lord of hostess the god of Israel: behold I will feed
this people with wormwood, and give them gall to drink: I will scatter them
among the Heathen, whom nether they nor their fathers have known. And I will
send a sword among the^ to persecute them and never leave, unto I bring them to
nought

If ye will not obey me, saith the Lord Ierem. 17 to walk in my laws which I
have geue^ you, and to hear the words of my serua^ts the Prophets whom I sent
unto you, and rising up timely, and still se^ding. If ye will not follow them I
say, then will I do unto this house as I did unto Silo, and will make this City
to be abhorred of all the people of the earth.

I will send upon them, sword, honger, Ierem. 29. and pestile^ce, because they
have not regarded my words, which I sent to them saith the Lord by my servants
the Prophets.

They would not take heed saith y^ lord, Zach. 7 but turned their back, and
stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Yea they made their hearts as an
Adamant stone, least they should hear the law and words which the Lord of
hostess sent in his spirit by the Prophets before time. Wherefore the Lord of
hostess was very wroth at the^. And thus it came to pass, that like as hee
spake and they would not hear, even so they cried and I would not hear, saith
the Lord of hostess.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
NOhe preached to the old world and Gen. 7 exhorted them to repent and amend
their life, or else god would surely plage them. But they laughed Nohe and his
doctrine to scorn, and continued in their abominable, and wicked living. What
followed? was not al the world drowned, right persons only excepted?

Lot seeing the unnatural most filthy Gen. 19 uncleanness of the stinking
Sodomits coun selled them to cease so to much licentiously* to offend their
Lord God. They would not hear Lot, nor his sermons, but churlishly entreated
him: what followed: Were they not consumed with water, fire and brimstone from
heaven? O most dread full plages.

After what sort the Israelites were plaged for their disobedie^ce to gods
word, the books of the old Testament do evidently declare.

The despisers of Gods word are punished many and sundry ways: as with sword,
pestilence, hunger, wilde beasts and fire.

sword Read Exod. 5. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 22. Iob. 19. Essay. 1. Iere. 9.
15. 20. 25. 29. 42. 43. 46. 50.


pestilence Read. Exod. 5. Len. 26. Deuteronomy. 18. 32. 1. Reg. 24. Psalm.
104. 1. Par. 22. Ezech. 7. 14 18. 33. 23. 38. Math. ^4.


Read^ Deuteronomy. 28. 32. 1. Reg. 24. Psalm. 104 Eccle. 39. Iere. 1^. 14. 18.
54. Amos. 8. Act. 11. Apoc. 18.


Beasts Read Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. Reg. 27. 3. Reg. 13. Sap. 16.
Essay. 18. Ieremy. 11. 15. 27. 34. Ezech. 4. 5. 14. 20. 32. 13. 39. Ose. ^


Read. Gene. 19. Leuit. 10. Number. 1. 16. 21. Deuteronomy. 32. Iosue. 7. 3.
Reg. 18. 2. Par. 7. Iob. 1. 15. 20. 31. Psalm. 10. 87. Essay. 9. 26 66. Ier.
15. 2. 7. Treno. 1. 2. Baruc. 4. Eze. 22 28. 30.. 38. 39. Danie. 3. Ose. 8.
Amos. 1. 2. Abd. 1. Mesh. 6. Sopho. 2. Nahum. 3. Zach. 11. 12. 13. Apo. 9. 11,
18. 19. 20.



Sentences out of the new Testament.
Whosoever shall not receive you nor Math* 10 hear your Sermons, go ye out of
that house or city, and shake the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you it
shall be more easy for the land of Sodomy and Gomorre at the day judgment, then
for that city.

Wo bee to the Choraryn, wo be to the Math. 11 Bethsaida. For if the miracles
which were showed in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented
long agony in sackcloth and ashes. Nevertheless I say unto you, it shall be
easier for Tyre and S^ don at the day of judgment, then for yon. And thou
Caparnaum, which art lift up unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell. For if
the miracles, which have been done in thee, had been showed in Sodomy, they had
remained unto this day. Nevertheless I say to you it shall be easier for the
land of Sodomy in the day of judge Math. 21 meant, then for thee.

The kingdom of God shall be taken fro^ you, and shall be given to a nation
which shall bring forth the fruits of it. And whosoever it shall fall upon it
will grind Math. 13 him to powder.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem which kill the Prophets, and stonest them which are
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together as the hen
ga thered her chekins under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your habitation
Luke. 10. shall be left unto you desolate.

He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he
Iohn. 3. that despises me despises him y^ sent me.

This is the condemnation that light is come into the world and men loved
darkness more then, light because their deeds Iohn. 12. were euel.

He that refuses me, says Christ and receaueth not my words, has one that
judges him. The word that I have spoken shall judge him at the last day.

If I had not com and spoken unto them, Iohn. 5. they should have had no sin,
but now they have nothing to cloak their sin withal. Act. 13.

It was mete that the word of God should first have been preached unto you, but
saying you put it from you, and think your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lowe tunre to the gentiles for so hath the Lord commanded vs. 1. These. 4

He that despises the preacher despises not man, but God which hath sent his
holy Spirit among you. Hob. 10*

He that despises Moses law dies without mercy under two or iii. witnesses. Of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be counted worthy, which treads
under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the testament isle an unholy
thing? Verily it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

The ungodly shall be so plaged, that they Apoca. ^ shall seek death, and find
it, they shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THey that were called to the marriage and would not come, but ungently treated
the messengers, were destroyed and their city brent up.

When Christ came near to Jerusalem, Luke, 19 he beheld the city and wept on
it, saying, if thou knew also even at this day, the things appertaining unto
thy peace, thou would be more diligent to look upon them.

But now are they hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that
thine enemies shall caste a bank about thee, and besiege and keep thee in on
every side, and make thee even with the ground, with thy children which are in
thee. And they shall not leave one stone upon an other, because thou know not
the time of thy visitation. Hereof may we learn that Jerusalem was destroyed,
because they would not receive Christ nor his word, but despised the doctrine
of their salvation, and the preachers of the same. If we do not repent and
amend, the same or more grievous plages abide vs.

Against carnal security and fleshly living withont fear of God.
IF Satan tempted thee to live after the lusts of the flesh without all fear of
God and to tak^ no thought for thy salvation, that by this means he may provoke
thee unto all kind of wickedness: loke hat thou by no means gave place to his
temptations, but rather watch the more diligently about hyne own health yt he
may not prevail against hee, enarme thy self with strong faith, and always et
before thine eyes these Scriptures following.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
Seek after God, and your soul shall Psalm. i^ live.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, Essay. 55 and cal upon him while he is
no. Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, so shall he be merciful unto him.
andc. Follow not the lust of thine own heart in thy strength, and say not:
tush, howe have I had strength? or who will bring me under because of my works?
for doubtless god shall avenge it. And say not: I have committed no sins, and
what evil hath happened to me? For the almighty is a patient rewarder. Because
thy syn is forgiven thee, be not therefore without fear, neither heap one sin
upon another. And say not, tush: the mercy of the lord is great, he shall
forgive me my sins be they never so many. For like as he is merciful, so goes
wrath from him also, and his indignation comes down upon sinners.

Make no tarrying to turn unto the lord and put not of from day to day, for
suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall destroy
the.

A man knows not his time, but like as the fishes are taken with the angle, and
as the birds are caught with the snare even so aremen taken in the perilous
time when it comes suddenly upon them.

Let thy garments be always white, and let thine head lack no ointment.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
THe people to whom. Nohe preached, would not amend but went forth to Gen. 7.
nousle themselves in all kind of worldlys pleasures, and even in the mydes of
their riotous living, the floude came and drowned them all.

The Sodomites laughing Lot and his Gen. 19. exhortations to scorn, and going
forth to offend God with their to much beastlike voluptuo^snes when they
thought themselves to be in most safeguard and furdest from any misfortune,
were consumed unto ass^es with fire and brimstone from heaue^.

The Jaws setting at nought y^ admo 4. Reg. ^ nitions of Gods Prophets
continued in all their wickedness and even in the midst of their carnal
security and fleshly quietness, god sent their enemies upon them, which
destroyed their cou^trey slew a great number of people, and led away most
miserable captives so many as pleased them, leaving the residue behind them in
most wretched slavery.

Sentences out of the ne^ Testament.
Watch for ye know not what hour Math. 24 your lord will come. Of this be ye
sure that if the householder knew what hour the thief would come he would
surely watch and not suffer his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also
ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, will the son of man come. Mhth. 2

Watch and pray, that ye fall not into temptation. Luc ^.

Let your loins be gird about and your lights be burning, and your selves like
men that waite for their moister when he will return from the weddings, that as
foone as he comes and knocks, they may open unto him. Blessed are those
servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find waking.

Take heed, watch and pray: for ye know Mark. 13. not when the time is: As a
man which is gone into a strange country, and hath left his house, and given
his substance to his servant, and to every man his work, and commanded the
porter to watch: Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of the
house will come, at eue^ or at midnight, whether at the cockecrow ing, or in
the dawning, lest if that he come suddenly, he find you sleping: and that I say
unto you, I say unto all: watch.

Take heed to your selves, least your ^uke. 21 hearts be grieved with sur^eting
and drone kens, and cares of the world, and that day come suddenly on you. For
as a snare shall it come on all them that sit on the face of the earth,

It is even now hye time that we w^ke ^om. 13 out of sleep.

Behold now is the accepted time, Cor. 6. now is the day of health.

The day of the Lord shall come even a^ These. 5. a thief in the night. When
they shall say peace and no danger, then comes there on them soden destruction,
as the travailing of a woman with child, and they shall not escape. Let vs not
sleep as other doo but let vs watch and be sober.

The Lord is at hand. Phil. 4.

Be patient and settle your hearts, for Iacob. 5 the coming of the Lord draws
nigh. Behold the judge sla^deth before the door.

Be sober and watch, for your adversary 1. Pet. 5. the devil walk about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, whom resist being steadfast in faith.

The day of the Lord shall come as a 2. Pet. 3. thief in the night.

Little children eue^ now is the last time. 1. Iohn. 2

Yet a little while, and he that shall come, Hob. 10. will come, and will not
tarry.

If thou shalt not watch, I will come on Apoc. 3 ^ as a thief, and thou shalt
not know what hour I will come vpo^ thee. Behold I come shortly. Hold that
which thou hast that no man take away thy crown.

Behold I stand at the door to knock. if any man hear my voice, and open the
door I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

The time is at hand. He that doth en^ Apoc. 12 let him do evil still. And he
which is filthy, let him be filthy still. And he that is righteous, let him be
more righteous. And he that is holy, let him be more holy. And because I come
shortly and my reward with me, to give every man according as his deeds shall
be.

Examples out of the new Testament.
That servant that dilige^tly watches Math. 14 at all hours for his masters
co^ming and doth in the mean season such things as his ma ster hath appointed
him is blessed: for he shall enter into his masters joy. But the servant that
lives without care is idle, watceth not, looks not diligently vpo^ his office
thinks not of his masters co^ming smites his fellows, eats and drinks with the
drunken that servant I say, shall have his part with Hipocrites, and shall be
cast into utter darkness, where weeping and and gnashing of teeth shall be.

The 5. wise virgins prepared both lamps and oil, tarriing, and watching Math.
25 for the coming of the bridgrome. There fore when he came they being in a
redines went in with him unto the wedding. But the five foolish Virgins
slumbered and slept, so that when the bridegroom came they were unprepared and
had no oil in their lamps, and therefore were they shut out of the doors, and
entered not into the marriage. Let vs therefore watch, for we know neither the
day nor the hour, when the son of man shall come.

Against the slackness of doing good works.
IF that futtle Satan by his crafty persuasions would at any time make thee
believe that thou art so thoroughly justified by faith alone, and so perfectly
saned by Christ only, that thou nedes^ not do any good works nor yet bring
forth the fruit of faith according to thy profession but live as thou lust, and
do what thou wilt, so at the full art thou saved thorough faith in Christ, take
hed^ thou be not deceived with this painted visar, but rather to the vtteri^ost
of thy power, labour to co^ firm thy faith with the plenteous doing of good
works working thinc own salvation as blessed Paule saith with fear and
trembling. And that thou majesty be the better encouraged so to do, set these
sentences and example of the holy scripturs ever before the eyes of thy mind.
Gen. 17.

Examples out of the old Testament.
I am the almighty God walk before me and be perfect.

Keep the commandments of the lord Deuteronomy. 6. thy God, and his witnesses,
and his covenants which he hath commanded thee, and do thou that which is
acceptable and good in the sight of the Lord, that thou may prosper.

Now Israel, what doth the lord thy god Deu. 10 require of thee? but to fear
the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, to love him, and to serve the
Lord thy God with all thine heart, and withal thy soul, namely that thou keep
the commandments of the lord and his ordinances, that thou majesty doe well and
prosper. Psalm. 1.

The faithful man is like a tree planted by the water side, that will bring
forth his fruit in due season.

Thou hottest althem (O Lord, that work Psalm. 5. iniquity.

Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Psal. 15. who shall rest upon thy holy
hill? Even he that leads an incorrupt life and works righteousness. andc.

Read the whole Psalm.

Depart from evil and do good. Psal. 34

Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be Psalm. 37. thou doing good.

Cease to do evil, learn to do good, Seek Essay. 1. to do right, deliver the
oppressed, help the fatherless to his right, defend the widow.

Break thy bread to the hungry, the noddy, Essay. 58. and the wayfaring man
lead thou into thy house. When thou see a naked man, cover him, and hide not
thy face from thy neighbour. andc.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Nohe was perfect and just in his generations, Gen. 6. 7. and walked with god,
loved god, that is to say, believed in god, leued god, feared god, sought the
glory of god, and framed his life according to the will of god, being plenteous
in al good and godly works: therefore God preserved him and his, when he
dro^ned all such as were wicked persons and doers of no good works.

Abraham was obedient to the will of god Gen. 17 and walked after his holy
commandments, ever doing good works: god therefore marvelously blessed him,
made him the father of many nations, and promised him, that in his seed all
kinreds should be blessed.

God saw the works of the Niniuites Ion. 3 (which undoubtedly sprang of faith,
for they believed the words of the Prophet) and he had psty on them and spared
them.

Sentences out of the new Testament
Now is the axe put to the root of the Math. 3 trees. Every tree therefore that
brings not forth good fruits is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Let your light so shine before men that Math. 5 they may see your good works
and glorify your father which is in heaven

Every good tree brings forth good Math. 7 fruit. An evil tree brings evil
fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit nor an evil tree good fruit.
Every tree that brings not forth good fxnte, is hewn down andeast tnto^he fire.

Whosoever hears of me these words ^ Math. 7 doth the same, I will like^ him
unto a wise man, which bnilte his house on a rock, andc.

A good man out of the good treasure of his hart, brings soorth good things,
and Math. 12 an evil man out of that evil treasure, brings forth evil things.

If ye were Abraha^s children, ye would ^ohn. 8 do Abrahams works.

We know that God hears no sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of ^. 9 God
and obedient his will, him hears he

He that hath my commandments, and kepeth the^, he it is that loves me. If any
man loves me, he will keep my words.

In the sight of God they are not righteous which hear tee law but the doers of
the law shall be ^uste fied.

We are the workmanship of God created in Christ Iesu, unto good works, which
god had prepared that we should walk in them.

Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds and put on the the new man which
after the image of god is shapen in righteousness and true holiness.

walk worthy of y^ lord in al things y^ please, being fruitful in al good
works, and ^ncreasing in the knowledge of God.

Br^theren be not weary in well doing.

Be to them that believe an example in word, in co^uersation, in love, in
spirit, in faith, and puernes.

Thou which art the man of Godfollowe righteousness, godliness, love, patience,
and ^eaknes.

The suer ground of God remains and hath this seal. the lord knows them y^ are
his: and let every man that calls on the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

Lusts of youth loke thou avoid and follow righteousness, faith, love, and pear
with them that call on the Lord with a pure hart. 1. Pet. 2.

Dearly beloved I beseech you as strau^gers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which fight against the soul. And see y^ ye have honest conversation
among the heathen, that they which backbite you as ill doers, may see your good
works, and praise God in the day of visitation. 1. Ioh. 1.

If we say we have fellowship with god, and yet walk in darkness, we lie, and
do not the truth. But if we walk in light, even as he is in light, then have we
fellowship with him, and the blood of Iesu Christ his son makes vs clean fro^
all sin.

He that doth righteousness, is righteus. 1. Iohn. 3. He that co^mitteth sin,
is of the devil, for the devil sins from the beginning.

See ye be doers of the word, and not Iames. 1. hearers only, deceiving your
selves.

Read the whole epistle of S. Iames.

God saith to the false and feigned Christians: Apoc. 2 I know the blasphemy of
them which cal themselves Jaws, and are not, but the Sinagoge of Satan.

Examples out of the new Testament.
THe idle were reproved because they Math. 20. wrought not, and they that would
labour, were hired into the vineyard, and at night received their reward.

The servants which received tale^ts Math. 2^ of their Lord and occupied them
and gained more by them, are praised and rewarded for well doing. But the idle
servant which would not occupy the talent that he received of his Lord but went
and hid it in the ground, gaining nothing therewith, was cast into utter
darkness, where weeping and gnashing of teeth is.

The fig tree which was unfruitful, and Marc. 1^ brought for the nothing but
leaves, was cursed and withered away.

Zache a ruler among the Publicans Luke. 19* gave half his goods to the poor
and if he did any man wrong, he restored him four times as much. Therefore said
Christ un to him: this day is health come to this house forasmuch as he also is
become the child of Abraham.

Against the troublous tempests of sickness, of loss of goods or any other kind
of adversity.
IF Satan when thou art assailed ^ any kind of trouble, labours to move thee to
despair of Gods good will toward thee, as though he had utterly forsaken thee,
given thee over, and care no more for thee, but sends thee that punishment and
lays y^ cross upon thy back ^ toke^ of his anger and heavy displeasure against
the, take heed that y^ doest not submit thy self to his subtle sugestio^s, but
rather persuade thy self that thy cross.

Whatsoever it he co^meth of the good will of god toward thee, and is sent unto
thee for thy health, comfort, and salvation. Look that thou therefore take it
both patiently and thankfully and that thou moist so do furnish thy breast with
these treasures of Gods most blessed word.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
After y^ lord hath punished the and tried the ^eut. 5. at last he will have
pity on the. The lord kileth and makes alive brings down to the grave and
fecheth up again. The lord makes pore and makes rich brings low and heauethe
upon high.

Call upon me in the time of thy troble, Psal. 50. and I will deliver the and
thou shalt honour me. Blessed is y^ man who^ thou nurterest, O Lord, and teach
him thy law.

It is for my wealth y^ thou haste brought Psal. 119. me under, y^ I may learn
thy righteousness

Naked came I out of my mothers wo^be Iob. 1. and naked shall I turn thither
again. The Lord gave and y^ lord hath taken away even as it pleases y^ lord so
is it come to pass, blessed be the name of the lord.

If we have received prosperity at y^ ha^d Iob. 2. of god, why should we not
also receive and suffer adversity.

Blessed is the man who^ God punishes Iob. 5. therefore refuse not thou ye
chastening of ye almighty. For though he make a wou^d he gives a plasture,
though he smite, his ha^d makes whole again.

My Son despise not the chastning of Pro. 3. the lord neither faint when thou
art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, him he chastened and yet delights
in him, as a father in his own son.

Whatsoever happens unto thee, receive Ecble. 2. it, suffer in heuines and be
patient in thy trouble. For like as gold and silver are tried in the fire, even
so are acceptable men in the fornace of adversity.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Iob being grievously plagued not only Iob. 1. with the loss of his goods, but
also with di ^ers diseases of his dody, praised the Lord ^uen in the midst of
his trouble.

Toby when he had lost his sight grudged Tob. 2. not against god that the plage
of blindness chanced unto him but remained steadfast in the fear of god, and
thanked God ^l the days of his life.

Ezechias being warned of God by the Prophet to prepare himself unto death^ ^ ^
death, prayed unto god in the time of his sickness, and obtained fifteen years
longer to live.

Manasses being before an Idolatour and a 2. Par. 3 maintainer of Idolatry,
after that god had plagued ^i, even whe^ he was in tribulatio^ He besoght ye
Lord his god, and humbled him self exceedingly before y^ god of his fathers,
and made intercessio^ to him: He hard his pray er, and brought him again to
Jerusalem into his kingdom.

Examples out of the new Testament
IF any man will come after me, let hi for Math* 26 sake him self and take his
cross and follow me.

By many tribulations must we enter Act. 14. into the kingdom of heaven*

We rejoice in tribulatio^, for we know Rome. 6 that tribulation brings
experience, experience brings hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

If we suffer together, we shall be glorified Rome. 8 together. For I suppose
that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of y^ glory which shall be
showed upon vs.

Be patient in tribulation. Rome. 12

If we live, we live to be at the lords will Rome. ^4 And if we dye, we die, at
y^ Lords will, whether we live therefore or die we are y^ lords.

While we are punished, we are corrected 1. Cor. ^ of the Lord, lest we should
with this world be condemned.

We are not wearied, but though our ont 2. Cor. 4 ward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. For our exceeding tribulation which is short
and light, prepares an exceeding and everlasting weight of glory unto vs, while
we loke not on the things which are seen but on the things that are not seenne.
For things which are seen, are temporal, but things which are not se^e, are
eternal.

Read the fist Chapter of the second to the Corinth. 2. Cor. ^

My strength is made perfect thorough weakness. Very gladly therefore will I
rejoice of my weakness, that the strength of Christ may dwell in me. andc.
Iacob. ^

Read the. 12. chapter, to the Hebrues.

Be patient and settle your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws ny.

Take the Prophets for an example of suffering adversity and of long patience:
which spake in the name of the Lord Be hold we count them happy which endure.
^e have heard of the patience of Iob, and have known what end the Lord made,
for the Lord is very pitiful and merciful. ^. Pet, 2.

The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The prodigal son before hee was Luc. 15. plagued gave his mind to all kind of
riot and unthrifty rule, but after that he was stricken with poverty, he
knowledged his fault, he submitted himself to his fathers will and pleasure,
and so was received again into favour.

A certain man after he had been punished Ihon. 5. with sickness for his sin by
the space of thirty eight years, was made whole of Christ.

There have been many good men both Hob. ^* in the old and new testament of
whom some were racked and would not be delivered that that they might receive a
better resurrection some tasted of mockinges and scourgings some of bonds and
imprisonment some were hewn a sunder, were tempted were slain with swoordes
walked up and down in sheues skins in goats skins, in need, in tribulation, and
vexatio^, which the world was not worthy of, they wandered in wilderness, in
mountains, in dens, and in caves of the earth. andc.

^ Against the temptation of the devil for not satisfiing the law, of god, and
for nby sinful living.
If Satan at the hour of death or any other timet would pluck the from thine
assuered and steadfast faith in Christs blood, and persuade thee that thou art
but a dampned wretch forasmuch as thou hast not so trained thy life that thou
hast satisfied the law of God, but rather lived wiakedly and therefore deserved
everlasting damnation, be on good comfort, des^ pair not, harken not to this
wicked suggestions, neither have thou respect to thy works and deeds (which
when they be most righteous and pure) ax as the Prophet saith like a cloth
polluted with m^ strue if they be co^pared to that purity and cleans which the
law requires, and should be judged of Gods righteousness according to their
deserts, but settle thine eyes steadfast on Christ and his merits. considering
not what thou haste done, but what Christ hath done for thee, if thou repent
and beleu^ and always have these most comfortable Scriptures in thy
remembrance.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
AL they that put their trust in thee, shall Psal. ^* not be put io confusion.
Call to remem bra^ce (O Lord) thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness which
have been ever of old. Oh remember not the sins and offences of my youth, but
according unto thy mercy think thou upon me O Lord, for thy goodness sake. Mine
eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of the net.

Because he hath put his trust in me, I Psal. 91 will deliver him, I will
defe^d him because he hath known my name.

Read the. 104. Psalm.

I know that thou would maliciously ^say. 48 offend, saith God. Therefore have
I called thee a transgressor, even from my mothers womb. Nevertheless for my
names sake I will withdraw my wrath, and it shall be for my honours sake, if I
patiently forbear thee and root thee not out.

By the knowledge of him which is my ^ay. 53 righteous servant saith God the
father of christ He shall justify the multitude, forasmuch as he hath borne
away their sins.

To know thee O Lord, is perfect right 15 ousnes, yea to know thy righteousness
and power, is the root of immortality.

Examples out of the old Testament.
Adam transgressed the^ commandment n. 3 of God in Paradise, and by his
transgression made both himself and all vs bound to eternal dampnation. Gen. 9

Nohe fell into the sin of drunkenness Gen. 19

Lot was not only drunken, but also lay with his own daughters: and so
committed the grievous sin of incest.

Abraham denied his wife. Gen. 20

Moses committed manslaughter. Dauid Exo. 2 committed both manslaughter and
whoredom.

Solomon was an idolator. 2. Reg. 11

All these with many other of the old 3. Reg. 1^ Testament were sinners and
offended the Lord their God by breaking of his laws, yet for their faith which
they had in that blessed seed which was so oft promised of God the father, even
Iesus Christ they were saved.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
We are not under the law but under grace.

The law of the spirit that brings life Rom^ 8 thorough Iesu Christ hath made
me free fro^ the law of sin and death.

Christ is the perfect fulfilling of the law To. 10 to justify all that believe

No man is justified by the law in the sight Gala. 3. of god. The just, that is
the faithful christian, shall live by faith.

Christ hath delivered vs from the curse of the law, while he was made accursed
for vs. Gal. 5.

As many of you as are justified by the law, are fallen from grace. We loke for
and hope in the spirit to be iukified thorough faith. Eph. ^

Christ is our peace, he hath broken down the wall that was a stop between vs,
he hath also put away thorough his flesh the cause of hatred, that is to say:
the law of commandments contained in the law written, be so making peace hath
reconciled vs to God thorough his cross.

Christ hath put out the, band wrighting, Colos. ^ that was against vs
contained in the law written, and that hath he taken out of the way and hath
fastened it to his cross and has spoiled rule and power, and hath made a show
of them openly, and hath triumphed ouor them in his own person.

Be it known to you, ye men and brethren, Act. 13. that thorough this manne
Christ: Is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and that by him all that
believe at justified from al things from the which ^ could not be justified by
the law of Moses

Examples out of the new Testament.
Math. 9 Matthew was a tol gatherer. Math. 20

The Apostles were ambitious and did strive amo^g them, who should be highest
and of greatest authority. Luke. 7.

Mary Magdalen was a grievous sinner. Iohn. 18

Peter denied and forsook Christ thrice. Act. 9.

Paule persecuted the congregation of Christ. Ioh. 7

Al these yea and why not? transgressed the law of God (for as Christ saith)
Moses hath given you a law and yet none of you do fulfil it not with standing
for their repentance and faith in Christ's blood they obtained remission for
their sins and are made the sons of God, heirs of God and fellow heirs with
christ of everlasting glory.

For if righteousness come by the law, Galat. 1 then died Christ in vain but
euerl^sting life is y^ gieft of God thorough Iesus Christ our Lord.

Against desperation for thy late conversion and turning unto God.
IF Satan lay to thy charge that thou comes very late and turn unto God out of
time, and therefore there is no hope to bee looked ^, set these scriptures
before thine eyes, and ever remember that there is no conversion unto God, to
late in this life ^f it come of faith, but at whatsoever hour a sinne^
repented, believes and turns unto God, he is well accepted and freely receives
remission of all his sins.

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
Let the ungodly man forsake his own Essay. 55. ways, and the unrighteous his
own imaginat ions, and turn again unto the Lord, so shall he be merciful unto
him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive.

Return (O thou rebel Israel) saith the Ierem. 3 lord, and I will not turn away
my face from you. For I am holy saith the lord, and I will not turn away my
face from you. For I am holy saith the Lord, and I will not be angry for
evermore.

As truly as I live, saith the Lord god, Ezech. 32 I have no pleasure in the
death of the wic ked, but much rather that the wicked turn from his way and
live. Turn you, turn you, from your ungodly ways. O ye of the house of Israel.
Oh, wherefore will ye die. The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him
whenever hee converts from his ungodliness.

If the wicked shall repent him and turn Ezech. 18 from al his sins which he
hath wrought, and shall keep all my precepts and do judge meant and
righteousness, he shall live and shall not dye, I will not remember all his
iniquities which he hath wronght. In his righteousness which he hath wrought,
shall he live. It is not my will saith the lord, that the wicked should dye,
and not rather that he should turn from his ways and live.

Turn and repent ye from al your iniquities, and your iniquityes shall work you
no displeasure. Cast away from you all your wickedness, wherein ye have
offended, and make you a new heart, and new spirit. And wherefore will ye die.
O ye house of Israel. For I will not that any man should dye, says the Lord.
Return therefore and live.

Turn to the Lord, your God, for he Ioel. ^ is great and merciful patient and
of much kindness, and ready at all times to forgive yea, eue^ whe^ he is at the
point to punish.

At all times when a sinner turns unto me saith the lord. I will no more bear
his iniquityes in my mind, but freely forgive them.

God appoints here no time of our co^ uersion, but whenever we turn, he pro
miseth vs favour, life mercy, and forgiveness of sin.

Examples out of the old Testament.
After that the Prophet Nathan at the Reg. 12. co^maundement of god, had
rebuked king Dauid for his dissolute manner of living. Dauid strait ways with a
sorrowful ripen taunt hart turned unto the Lord, and hu^bly confessed his sins,
saying. I have offended the Lord. The Prophet immediately answered, the Lord
also hath put away thy sin. Dauid did not so soon convert but that he was as
soon forgiven to signify unto vs, that at what so ever time wee unfeignedly
turn unto the Lord our god, he will have mercy on vs and forgive vs.

The Niniuites for their abominable ^na. 3. living were threatened utterly to
be destroy ed within forty days but they falling unto repentance and turning
unto the lord their GOD were forgiven, spared and not destroyed.

Sentences out of the new Testament
They that are whole, have no need of a Math. ^ Phisicion, but they that are
sick? I came not to call the righteous but sinners unto repentance?

Come unto me all ye that labour and Math. ^ are laden, and I shall refresh
you. Here Christ prescribes no time, he only bids vs come and be the burdens of
our sins never so grievous and heavy, yet will be ease vs of them.

The Son of man came to seek and Luc. 19 save that which was lost.

God will have all men to be saved, and 1. Tim. ^. to come to the knowledge of
the truth. If any man sins, we have an advocate 1. Ihon. 2^ with god the
father, Iesus Christ ye right os one. And he it is that obtains mercy for our
sins, not for our sins only, but for all the worlds.

Examples out of the new Testament
The labourers in the Lords vineyard Math. 1^. that came last of all received
their penny s^wel as they that came in the morning, nei there had one more then
another.

The history of the thief, which was full Lu^. 32. of wicked deeds, and never
turned unto God, until the very hour of his death declares manifestly that
there is no con uersion in this life to late, if it be accompanied with true
repentance and unfeigned faith. The thief hanging on the cross, and at the
point of death only said to Christ, Lord remenber me when thou co^mest into thy
kingdom. And Christ well accepti^g his conversion, said unto him: truly I say
unto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.

Against sin, death, and hell.
IF Satan in the time of sickness or else wha^, go about to fray thee and to
quench thy spirit, either with the greatness of thy sins or else with the error
and fierceness of death and hell, be not dismayed, but with a lusty courage
resist his temptations, with these most sweet and comfortable scriptures.

Sentences out of the old Testament.
I am he indeed saith god he which puteth Essay. 43 away thy sins, yea and that
for mine own sake, and will reme^ber them no more. As for thine offe^ces I have
driven the^ away like the clouds and thy sins as the mist. Turn thee again unto
me, for I have redeemed thee.

Where is there such a god as thou art^ Mesh. 7. that pardonest wickedness, and
forgeuest the offences of the remnant of thine heritage. He keeps not his wrath
for ever. And why? for his delight is to have compassion. He shall turn again,
and be merciful to vs, hee shall put down our wickedness, and caste al our sins
into the bottom of the sea.

Out of the power of death saith the lord will I deliver them, yea from the
death it self will I redeem them. O death I will be thy death, O hell, I will
swallow thee up.

Examples out of the old Testament.
That holy king and prophet Dauid, being Psal. 20. fully persuaded that by
Christ which was to come, Sedans head was broken a sunder, sin was vanquished,
death was overcome, hell was swalowed up, that they could nothing hurt that
faithful man lamented and sorrowed, that he continued so long in this vale of
misery, and most heartily wished to be delivered out of this prison, and to go
unto the Lord his God.

That godly and ancient father Toby, knowing that neither sin, death, nor hell,
can do any thing against gods chose^ people which in Christ have gotten the
victory over them al, so that they need not to fear death, nor any thing to
come after this life, prayed to god on this manner: Now O lord droll with me
according to thy will, and commau^d my spirit to be received in peace, for more
expedient were it for me to dye, than to live.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Christ shall save his people from their Math. 1 sins.

Behold the Lamb of God that takes Iohn. 1 away the sins of the world.

There is no damnation to the^ that are Rome. 8. graft in Christ Iesu.

Christ came into the world to save ^. Titus. 1. sinners.

The blood of Iesu Christ makes vs ^. Iohn. 1 clean from all sin.

Thorough the name of Christ al Prophets Acts. 13 bear witness, that so many as
believe in him, shall receive remissio^ of their sins. Death is swalowed up
into victory. Where 1. Cor. 15 is thy sting O death? Where is thy victory O
hell? The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks
bee to God, which hath given vs the victory thorough our Lord Iesus Christ.

By death hath Christ put him to flight Hob. 2. that had lordship over death,
that is to say, the Devil, that he might deliver them, which thorough the fear
of death were all their life time in danger of bondage.

Examples out of the new Testament.
SO soon as the ancient father Simeon Luke. ^ had seen and received Christ into
his arms, he fering neither sin, death nor hell, showed himself ready to depart
out of this world, and spake with a joyful voice O Lord now latest thou thy
servant depart in peace. andc.

Blessed Paule knowing that thorough Phil. 1. Christ the power of sin, death
and hell is so altogether weakened, that they can do the faithful no harm:
wished to be losoned out of this world, and to be with Christ.

Against them that deny the resurrection of the body.
IF that old enemy Satan labour to persuade thee, that there is no resurrection
of the dead, but as the body returns to death, so shall it for ever continue in
the earth, and never receive life again, nor line either in glory or in peace
after this present life, that therefore thou majesty live as thou just, defend
thy self against his cruel assaults ^ these sente^ces and exa^ples of the holy
scripture.

Sentences out of the old, Testament.
The Lord kills and makes alive again, Reg. 2. brings down to the grave, and
stretchet^ up again.

I am sure, that my redemer lives, and ^b. 19. that I shall rise out of the
earth in the latter day, and that I shall be clothed again with this skin, and
see god in my flesh, yea I my self shall behold him, not with other but with
these same eyes.

These that be dead will I raise up again ^. Esdr. 2 from their places, and
bring them out of the graves.

Thy dead shall live, even with my body Essay. 26. shall they rise again. Awake
and singe ye that dwell in the dust. For thy dew is even as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out of her them that be under her, the earth shall
disclose her own blood, and shall no more hide ^em that are slain in her.

Your bones shall flourish like an herb. Essay. 66

Behold saith god, I will put breath in Ezech. 37. to you, that ye may live, I
will give you sinews, and make flesh grow upon you and cover you over with
skin, and so give you breath that ye may live and know that I am the Lord. Thus
saith the Lord god, behold I will open your graves (O my peo ple) and take you
out of your Sepulchres Dan. 12.

Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reproof.

Examples out of the old Mestament.
THe Prophet Helias raised up fro^ death 3. Reg. 1^ unto life the Son of the
widow of Sarepta, which is in Sidon.

Helizeus obtained of God a Child for 4. Reg. ^ his Hostess, which dyed, and as
afterword by the prayer of Helizeus raised unto life.

Read and mark diligently the 37. Chapiter of Ezechiel.

A certain woman with her 7. Children 2. Mac. ^ were cruelly put to death
because they would not eat swines flesh, contrary to gods word at the
commandment of the king. The second of the brethren said unto the king, thou
most ungracious person put vs now to death, but the king of the world shall
raise vs up (which die for his laws) into resurrection of everlasting life.

The mother of the 7. Children said thus unto them: I cannot tel how ye ^am in
my wo^be, for I neither gave you breath nor soul, no, nor life. It is not I
that joined the members of your bodies together, but the maker of the world,
which fashioned the birth of man and began all things. Even he also of his own
mercy shall give you breath and life again, like as ye now regard not your own
selves for his laws sake.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
AS touching the resurrection of y^ dead Math. 23 have ye not read, what is
said unto you of god, which says: I am Abrahams god, and Isaackes god, and god
is not the god of the dead, but of the living.

The hour shall come in the which all ^ohn. 5. that are in the graves shall
hear his voice and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto ye
resurectio^ of life, and they ye have done euel unto ye resurrectio^ of
damnatio^.

I know that my brother shall rise again ^ohn. 11 at the latter day.

God hath raised up ye Lord, and shall rais^ ^. Cor. 6. vs up by his power. If
there be no rising again from death, then is Christ not risen.

If Christ is not risen, then is our preaching ^. Cor. 15 vain, and your faith
is also vain.

Read and commend to memory the xv. Chapiter of the first to the Corinth.

The Lord Iesus shall change our vlle bodies, that they may be fashioned like
un to his glorious body. andc.

I would not brethern have yon ignora^t 1. Tim. 4 concerning them which are
fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do, which have no hope. For if we
believe y^ Iesus Christ died and rose again, even so they also which sleep by
Iesus, will god bring again with him. Read forth.

^ Examples out of the new Testament.
CHrist raised from death the daughter of Math. 9 y^ Ruler, the Son of a
certain widow, and Lazarus, with many other. These are evident examples of our
resurrection.

After Christ had given up the ghost, Math. 27. the graves did open, and the
bodies of ma ny Saints which slept, arose, and came out of y^ graves after his
resurrectio^ and ca^e into the holy city and appeared unto many.

Christ rose again from death the third Math. 28. day according to the
scriptures, and was scene of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that he was
scene of mo then five hundredth brethern at once. andc

S. Peter raised Tabitha from death. Act. 9

S. Paule restored unto life a certain ^ct. 20 young man named Euticus.

Christ rebuked the Seduces, because Math. 22 they believed not the
resurrection of ye ded.

The Epicures and Stoykes laughed S ^ct. 17. Paule to scorn, when as he at
Athens taught the resurrection of the dead. But he defended the doctrine.

Against them that deny the immortality of the soul.
IF Satan or any of his, tempte thee to live at thy pleasure, labouring to
persuade the ^y sophi sticall reasons of carnal imaginations y^ the soul of man
is but as the breath of other beasts, and that after the dissolutio^ of the
body it is nothing, nether lives afterword, but hath an end with the body, take
heed that thou gave no place to such wicked and most damnable doctrine, but
enarme thy self a against it with these authorities of the holy Scripture

^ Sentences out of the old Testament.
GOd created man in his own image, Gen. 1 in ye image of god created he him,
male and female created he them.

The Lord god shope man even dust fro^ Gen. 2. the ground, and breathed in his
nostrils the breathe of life, and Adam was made a living soul.

I should utterly have fainted, but that ^salm. 27 I believe verily to s^ the
goodness of ye lord in the land of the living.

Like as the heart desires the water brookes, so longs my soul after thee O
god. My soul is a thirst for god, yea even for the living god, when shall I
come to ap pear before the presence of god?

The body shall be turned again unto Eccles. ^ earth, from whence it came, and
the spirit that is the soul shall return unto God which gave it.

God made man to be undestroyed, that Sap. 2. is to say immortal, yea after the
image of his own likeness made be him. The souls of the righteous are in the
hand of God, and the pain of death shall not hurt them. In the sight of the
vnwisethey seem to die, and their end is taken for very destructio^, but they
are in rest.

The hope of the faithful is full of immortality.

The righteous shall live for evermore Sap. 5. their reward also is with the
Lord, and their remembrance with the highest. Therefore shall they receive a
glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown of the Lords hand. Read the third,
fourth and fifth Chapiters of the book of Wisdom.

We are the children of holy men, and look for the life which God shall give
unto them, that never turn their faith from him.

Examples out of the old Testament.
THe holy scripture testifies, that Ehore Number. 16 and his accomplices went
down quick unto Hell, and the earth covered them, so that they perished. By
this it is evident, that the souls of the wicked are immortal, and live in the
pains of hell fire.

If Saule had not believed both the resurrection Reg. 28. of the body, and
immortality of the soul, he wold never have gone about to have had Samuel
raised up.

When Dauid saw that his child was ^. Reg. 12 dead, he wept no more, but said,
I shall go unto him, he shall not come again unto me

Helias prayed for the raising up again ^ Reg. 17 unto life of his hostess Son,
saying: O Lord my God, I beseech thee let the soul of this Child come into him
again. And he revived. ^ob. 2

When Tobias was laughed to scorn of his elders and kinssolkes, which said un
to him: here is thy hope for the which thou hast done almose and buried the
dead. He rebuked them and said: say not so, for we are the children of holy
men, and look for the life which god shall give unto the^ that never turn their
faith from him.

Again he prayed unto god on this ma Tobi. 3 ner. Now O Lord, deal with me
according to thy will, and command my spirit to be received in peace. For more
expedie^t were it for me to dye, than to live.

Sentences out of the new Testament.
Fear not them which kill the body, Math. 10 but are not able to kill the soul.
But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

There is no man that hath forsake^ house, Luke. 18 either father or mother,
either brethren or wife, or children, for the kingdom of Gods sake, which shall
not receive much more in this world, and in the world to come life everlasting.

This is the will of him that sent me, Iohn. 6 that every one which sees the
son, and believes on him, have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know Iohn. 10 them, and they follow me, and I
give un to them everlasting life, and they shall never peryshe, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand.

I am the resurrection and the life. He Iohn. 11 that believes on me, yea
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes on me,
shall never dye.

Let not your hart be troubled. Ye believe Iohn. 14 in God, believe olso in me.
In my fathers house are many mansions. If it were not so, I would have told
you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I
will come again and receive you even unto my self, that where I am, there may
ye be also.

Father I will that they which thou hast ^oh. 17. given me, be with me where I
am, that they may see my glory, which thou hast given me.

We know that if our earthy mans^on ^. Cor. 5 of this dwelling were destroyed,
we have a building of God an habitation n^t made with hands, but everlasting in
heaven. Read forth the Chapter.

When soever Christ our life shall appear, Col. 3 then shall you also appear
with him in glory.

The lord himself shall come down ^. These. 4. from heaven with a shoot and the
voice of the Archangel and tromp of God. And the dead in Christ shall arise
first, then we which shall live ( even we which shall remain) shall be caught
up with them also in the clouds, to mete ye Lord in the ayre and so shall we
ever be with the lord. Therefore comfort your selves one another with these
words.

The spirit or soul is before God a precious thing and much set by.

Christ was killed as pertaning to the flesh, 1. Pet. 3. but was quickened in
the spirit. In which spirit he also went and preached unto the spirits that
were in prison. andc. Here it is manifest that the spirits or souls of men are
immortal, and live either in glory or in payne after they be losoned from the
body.

Examples out of the new Testament.
WHen the Sad^ces denied the resurrec Math. ^ tion of the body, and the
immortality of the soul, Christ answered the^ saying have ye not read what is
written? I am the God of Abraha^, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. He is
not the God of the dead, but of the living. By this testimony of the holy
scripture Christ declares that though Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, and al other of
the faithful be dead, as concerning their bodies, yet their souls live with
God, and are immortal.

The history of the pore ma^ Lazarus and of Luke. 16. the rich unmerciful
gloton, proves evidently that the souls dye not with the body, nor yet sleep
until the day of judgment (as the ungodly Anabaptists dream) nether are they
cast into purgatory, as the papists teach, but that the souls of the faithful
go immediately after their departure from the body, unto eternal glory, and the
souls of the unfaithful, unto everlasting damnation: so that the souls of al
men are immortal and live for ever, either in heaven or in hell, in glory or in
payne.

The parable of the unrighteous steward sets forth also the immortality of the
soul, as these words of Christ do declare, Make you friends, saith he of the
wicked Mammon, that when ye shall depart hence, they may receive you into
euerlastig dwell ling places.

The soul came again to the widows ^uke. 7 son, to the rulers daughter, to
Lazarus, to them that after Christ's resurrection came out of their graves, to
Dor^s, to Eu tichus. andc. Which thing declares ma^festlye that the soul dies
not with the by die, but still lived and remained immortal.

The thief that hanged one the cross Luke. 23 with Christ, said unto him. Lord
remember me, when thou shalt come into thy kingdom. Christ answered verily I
say unto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise. The body of the
thief dyed shortly after, and was committed to the earth. The soul of the thief
was in paradise with Christ. The soul therefore lives and remains immortal, or
else must Christ be a liar. But let God be true, and all heretikes liars.

Saint Stephen being at the point of Act. 7 death, prayed, saying: lord Iesu
take my spirit.

Saint Paule wished to be losoned out Phil. 1 of his body and to bee with
Christ. I saw under the alter, saith Saint Iohn, the souls of them that were
killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they had, and they
cried with a loud voice, saying: howe long tariest thou O lord, bolye and true,
to judge and to avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? and lunge
white garments were given unto every one of them. And it was said unto them,
that they should rest for a little season until the number of their fellows and
brethren, and of them that should be killed as they were, were fulfilled.

Of the glory of heaven, and of everlasting life.
IF Satan go forth to tempt thee that thou might lose the inheritance of the
kingdom of god, and say unto thee that thou art a sinner and an abominable
liver, and therefore thy faith is frustrate, and thy hope vain in looking for
the glory of heaven, for God is a righteous Judge, and rewards every man
according to his deeds and merits: let all these his crafty^ assaults nothing
move or abash thee, but call to thy remembrance and believe steadfastly, that
the heavenly kingdom is not given thee for thy merits and deserts (for so
shouldest thou receive nothing but eternal dampnation) but for the promises
which god the father hath made thee in Christ's blood, if thou repent and
believe. Therefore cast away that rightousnes which the hypocrites challenge by
their good works, and lay hands on that which comes by faith of Iesus Christ,
so can thou not be deceived, so can satan win nothing at thy hand, so can it
not but come to pas, that thou shalt enjoy the glory of heaven thorough Christ
Iesu. And that thou may doubt nothing in this behalf, imprint these sentences
and examples of the holy ^ scripture dilige^tly and earnestly in thy mind.

^ Examples out of the old Testament.
THe Lord hath saved me because it was ^salm. 23. his pleasure.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, which forgives all
thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities, which saves thy life from
destructio^ and crowns the with mercy and loving kindness. Essay. 37

They that put their trust in me shall inherit the land, and possess my holy
hill. Osec. 13

Thy damnation (O Israel) came of thy self, but thy salvation comes of me.

Examples out of the old Testament.
That princely Prophet Dauid being thoroughly persuaded that the inheritance of
the glory of heaven and the possession of everlasting life is the free gift of
god thorough Iesus Christ, and is denied to none, although never so sinful and
wretched, if they repent: being nothing appalled with his former sinful liuig,
as though y^ should pluck him from the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom,
knew what blessed felicity and joyful quietness the souls of the faithful do
enjoy after their departure fro^ the bodies: lamented, he carried so lunge in
this vale of misery, and no less fervently desired to come and appear before
the face of god, than the thirsty heart desires to come to the water brookes.

The godly ancient Toby knowing gods exceeding great liberality in the gift of
everlasting quietness after the humble submission of him self unto the Lord his
god, wished rather to die than to live, and beseeched god that his spirit might
be received in peace.

^ Sentences out of the new Testament.
Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers ^uc. 12 pleasure to give you a
kingdom.

Everlasting life is the gift of God thorough Rome. 6 Christ our Lord.

Whom god has predestinate, them Rome. 8. hath he also called, whom he hath
called, them also hath he justified whom, he hath justified, them has he
glorified.

The eye hath not scene, and the ear hath 1. Cor. 2 not heard, neither hath it
entered into the hart of man, what things god hath prepared for them that love
him.

By grace are ye saved thorough faith, and Ephe. 2 that not of your selves. For
it is the gift of god, and comes not of works, least any man should boast him
self.

God saved vs, not for the deeds of righ Tim. 3. teousnes which we wrought, but
for his mercy and loving kindness.

God hath given vs everlasting life, and 1. Iohn. 5 this life is in his Son, he
that has the Son hath life: and he that has not the Son of god, hath not life.

Be faithful unto the death, and I will Apoc give thee the crown of life.

To him that ouerco^meth will I give Apoc to sit with me in my seat, even as I
overcame and have sat with my father in his seat.

Examples out of the new Testament.
The reverent and ancient father Simeo^ Luke. being nothing appalled with y^
reme^brau^ce of his sins, after he had seen and embra sed Christ in his arms,
knowing him to be the alone Saviour of the world, showed himself ready, glad
and willing to dye, that he might enjoy that heavenly inheritance purchased by
the same Iesus Christ our Lord. Phil. ^

S. Paule being fully persuaded that al his sins were washed away in Christ's
blood, desired to be loosoned from that his mortal body and to be with Christ.

Virescit vulnere virtus.

Give the glory to god alone.

Here ends the Governance of virtue.
Here follows certain godly prayers, for sundry and divers purposes.
A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father high and mighty king of kings, lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes, which doest from thy throne behold al y^ dwellers upon
earth most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behold our^ most
gracious sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with the grace of
thy holy spirit, that she may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way.
Endue her plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant her in health and wealth long
to live, strength her that she may vanquish and overcome al her enemies. And
finally y^ after this life, she may attain everlasting joy and felicity,
through Iesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A general confession.
O Lord God almighty, father of mercy, and God of all comfort, we thy poor
creatures resort unto thee, knowledgyng and confessing our selves before thy
glorious majesty, that we are all grievous sinners, and can of our selves do
nothing but sin. For all our imaginations, intents and thoughts are inclined
and disposed unto euel from our youth up. Our damnation co^meth of our selves,
wee our selves are not able to think a good thought. It is thou only that doest
work in vs both the will and the dede.

We are but earth and naturally the children of wrath. We of our selves are but
vain, yea lighter then vanity it self. We can do nothing without thee, theris
not one of vs whole, we are all unclean, and al our rightousnes is but as a
filthy cloth. We have no more power to doo good of our selves then a man of
Inde hath power to change his skin, or the leopard her spots. Now according to
this euell and corrupt inclination of our nature so have we lived in thought^
word and deed. We have fined, we have offended, Dan. ^ we have gone back from
thy law, and have not harkened unto thy word. We have not loved th^, O Lord
with all our strength, with all our heart, with all our power. We have been
sore transgressors of thy commandments, wee have not putt our whole trust, and
confidence only in thee. Wee have in our troubles and need, not sought for help
only in thee. We have not called only upon thy name, but with false confidence,
with vain supersticion, and unlawful othe^, have we blasphemed thy name. We
have prayed and made intercession unto stocks and stones, and made the
creatures our advocates and mediators co^trary to thy word. We reposed our
trust and affiance in our own deeds* and in such works as have been devised by
men's fantasies besides the scripture. We have wandered on vain pile gremages,
offering up money, candels, and tapers to Images and relics, with such like
supersticion. We have been slothful in our business. We have not been ferue^t
and diligent in doing of our duty. Special lie on such days as be appointed for
the preaching of thy word, we have not plied our selves wholly to learn it, nor
occupied our time in prayer, and giving of thanks unto thee. And as touching
the love that we ought to have unto all men and women for thy sake, we have not
been ernest in it at al times. We have not loved our neigh hour as our selves,
we have not done as we would be done unto, we have been ungentle, vnpacie^t,
discourteous, froward, angry and displeased: we have rejoiced in our neighbours
hurt and been sorry of his welfare. We have been led with false doc trine and
errors from the way of thy truth. We have sinned with our fathers, we have don
amiss, we have dealt wickedly, therefore our most dear father which art in
heaue^, forasmuch as we have blasphemed thee and not sought always the glory of
thy name, grant now that from henceforth thy name may be sa^ctified and halowed
in vs. Grant now that thy kingdom may come, and that in steed of sin and error
thou only majesty reign in vs: grant now that our will may be co^formable unto
thine, and that in al adversity we may be heartily well content to suffer thy
will to be done in vs. Grant now, that we bee never destitute of our daily
food, but that we may always be nourished with thy word in our souls, and have
such a competent living in this life as is necessary for our body Grau^t now
that we may even from our heart roots, forgive one another all manner of
trespass, as y^ for Iesu Christ's sake thy Son, haste mercifully forge^ vs.
Grau^t now that where the world the devil, and our own flesh, doth daily tempt
and provoke vs to sin, we may thorough thy strength be able to resist all their
temptation, Grant now that thorough thy help and grace we may be delivered from
all evil, from all danger, and peril of soul and body, from all sin, hell, and
dampnation, from all pride, and enny, from all wrath, and slothfulness, fro^
covetousness, unmeasurable and filthy living. Grant now, that from hence forth
we may be content with such fatherly pro vision as thou haste made for vs
already, grant now that we may be temperate in eating and drinking. And of so
honest and cleanly co^uersation, that we give no man occasion of evil. Grant
now that in stead of our old feigned works we may be occupied with such fruits
of thy holy spirit, as thy word makes mention of. Grau^te now, that according
to the wholesome monition of thy blessed apostle Peter and of al the scripture
beside, we may be faithful true and obedie^t unto the king our sovereign Lord
and Supreme head immediately under Christ. And not only unto al such officers
as be se^t of him, but also unto al such wholso^ laws and iniunetions as by his
autority be made for ye tranquilt tie and wealth of vs his subjects. Grant now
that we al may increase in ye knowledge of the, that our youth may be brought
up in virtue, that children may obey their fathers and mothers, that servants
may be true to their masters, that landlords may be gentle to their tenants,
that husbands may be loving to their wives, and wives likewise to their
husbands, that men may keep their household in the fear and knowledge of thee,
ye idle people may be set to labour, and that al such as be poor in dede, may
be well and lovingly provided for. Grant ye for the love of thee we may fed y^
hu^gry, give drink to y^ thirsty cloth ye naked, give lodging to the^ that be
harbourlesse, ^urye the dead, visit the^ that be in prison, and help such as be
in sickness. Finally, grant now most merciful father, that whatsoever thou
forbiddest, we may forbear it, and whatsoever: thou* co^maundest, we may every
one in his calling perform the same, and so co^tinue in thy service till our
lives ends, that al our thoughts, words and deds may redound un to ye glory of
thee, now and evermore Ame^.

Thanks be given to God. Obedience unto our Prince^ and love to our neighbours.
For the City or town wherein thou duellist.
EXcept thou (O merciful lord God almighty) keep the city, the watchmen wake
but in vain that keep it. Therefore O lord god, send thy holy spirit into y^
harts of them which rule our city or town, to the intent that we with them and
they with vs, may live in thy godly fear, so that it may go well with vs. And
suffer vs not good Lord to put our trust any more in worldly power, as money,
horse, weapon artillery, guns or strong walls, but much rather in thee, which
art adefender of al them that put their whole affiance and trust in thee.

For kings, Princes, and Rulers.
O Lord of Lords, Iesus Christ thou art an example and glass or mirror of the^
which govern and bear rule of realms, cou^treis and cities whom they ought to
follow, for thou art the best and the wisest, and therefore can thou not err
nor doe any other thing but well. Vouchsafe with the light of thy clearness,
and with the fire of thy love, to kindle the hearts of al such as thou through
thy godly prouide^ce hast instituted and ordained to be rulers over the people,
to the intent that they through thee as by a fore going light, may see and
perceive what is best to be done, and fulfil the same, and that they taking
thee always for a sure mark of their eye, do not that thing which only seems
good in their sight, but that which may be to thy honour, to our profit, and to
their health and salvation, to the intent also that they may justly and duly
minister, and execute their office geue^ unto the^ of thee, so that we with
the^, and they with vs, may lead a peaceable, virtuous, and quiet life So be
it.

Wheu thou goosed to thy labour or work.
O Most kind and gentle heavenly father thou know and hast taught vs how great
the weakness of man is so that no man without thy godly help, can do any thing.
Thus vo^chiafe to send vs thy ho lie spirit, ye he may strengthe^, stir and
endue our vndersta^ding and reaso^ in al things, ye we this day outwardly shall
go about. and take in hand, or it that we in wordly shall think or have in
mind, to the intent that it may be done to thy glory, and to y^ profit of our
neighbour.

A Prayer for a godly life
IT greatly grieves vs, O merciful Father and everlasting God, that we thorough
the gre^ous and continual assaults of our enemies are not able to pass over our
years in this world with such purity of life, as we ought, and as thou require
of vs. Verily we are on every part so besieged and compassed round about of our
adversaries, that scarcely at any time we can be free from their pestiferous
and deadly darts, nor yet have so much respite as once to breath toward true
godliness. Oh most loving Lord, thou art our Father and we thy children:
convenient therefore is it that we thy children represent and openly declare in
our conversation the manners of thee our father.

Thou art good, gentle, loving suffering holy, righteous, faithful. andc.

It therefore becomes vs thy children in our living to practise goodness,
gentleness love, charity, mercy, patience, lunge suffering holiness,
righteousness, faith. andc

Thou haste given vs an example Ioh. 13 that even as thou hast done, so we
likewise should do. If we say we dwell in thee, we ought to walk as thou haste
walked.

For thou hast called vs not to uncleanness, 1. Iohn. 3 but unto holiness.

Thou hast delivered vs from y^ power 1. These. 4. of our enemies, that we
being without fear should serve the^, in holiness and righteous nes all the
days of our life.

The blood of thy son Iesu Christ 1. Ioh. 1 hath cleansed vs from al sin, net
that we should continue in darkness, but rather walk in the light, as thou art
in light. Thy loving kindness hath appeared unto all men, not that we should
follow ungodliness and worldly justs, but that we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

Thou did chose vs in Christ before Ephe. 1. the foundacions of the world were
laid, that we should be holy and without blame before thee through him.

We are thy workmanship created in Ephe. 2. Christ Iesu unto all good works
which thou ordayneste before, that wee should walk in them. Forasmuch then as
all the benefytes which thou haste bestowed upon vs, are given unto this e^de,
that we should walk worthy of thy kindness, represent thy manners in our
co^uersation, mortify the flesh and the lusts thereof, have nothing to do with
Satan, nor the world, but lead a good life garnished full of good works, and in
all points fashioned after the rule of thy blessed words: we most heartily pray
thee to endue vs with thy holy spirit, which may take away our stony hart, and
give vs a new fleshly and soft heart, kill that old man in vs which is corrupt
thorough deceivable lusts, and fashion in vs that new man which is made after
thy image and likeness in righteousness and true holiness. Suffer vs not to
give over our selves again unto our old lusts and conc^piscences, where with we
were led when we knew not thee nor thy So^ Christ, but eue^ as thou which hast
called vs art holy, so likewise grant yt we may^ be holy in all our
conversation. O merciful god, not the hearers of thy law but th^ ful^llers of
it shall be justified. Neither sha^ Math. 7. every one that saith unto thee:
Lord, Lord enter into the kingdom of heaue^, but the that do the will of thee
our Father which art in Heaven. To confess thee with our mouth, and to deny
thee with our deeds, works rather our damnation then salvation. For the true
knowledge of thee consists not in talking, but in working, not in favouring,
but in following, not in loving, but in living. To promise thee by mouth, that
we will work in thy vineyard, and yet work nothing at all, declares not vs to
bee thy sons, but rather bastards. To brag of the justification of faith, and
not to bring forth the fruits thereof, to glory in the merits of thy son
Christ, in his blood, death and passion, and not to live worthy in his kind
ness, to profes thy holy gospel, and not to walk according to the doctrine
thereof, to be baptised in thy name and not to morti^y our members which are of
the earth, nor to walk in a new life, to be partakers of the divine mysteries,
and not to bee made one spirit with thee: what avails it? Wee are thy friends,
if wee doo those things that thou command vs. We are thy servants, if we be
obedient to thy will. Wee are thy Sons, if we honour and reverence thee
according to thy word. We seek thy glory, if we attempt nothing, whereof thou
shouldest be dishonoured. Leadinge a life confirmable to thy blessed will, wee
shall provoke the ve rye enemies of thy truth to praise thee, but co^trariwise,
thou shalt be euel spoken of. Grant therefore we beseech thee, that our life
may answer to our professio^: and that the light of our good works may so shine
before men, that they saying our godly co^uersation, may glorify thee our
heavenly father.

Amen.
A short prayer to be said at the receiving of the mystery of Christ's body at
the holy communion.
O Heavenly and blessed father, I render unto thee most hearty thanks for all
thy benefits, which thou hast showed unto me most wretched sinner, but
specially for y^ most sweet smiling sacrifice which thy only begotten son
offred unto thee on the alter of the cross, by giving his most pure and
undefiled body unto the death for the redemption of mankind, in the
remenbraunce whereof according to thy welbeloned sons ordinance, I now receive
this holy bread, most entirely beseeching thee, ye I may both be partaker of
the merits of thy dear sons body breaking, and also lead a life worthy of so
great a benefit, unto the glory of thy name.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said at the receiving of the mystery of Christs blood in the
holy communion.
O Blessed and merciful Father, thy love toward me sinful creature is so
exceeding great and unspeakable, that I cannot but give unto thee most hu^ble
tha^ks* namely for the sheding of the most precious blood of thy dear Son Iesu
Christ, by the virtue whereof thy wrath stirred up against me wretched sinner,
is pacified: My ransom is payed, the law is fulfilled, my enemies are overcome
and put to flight. In remembrance of this so noble a victory and of so great a
benefit, I am come to this thy table, O merciful father to drink of this cup.
Desiring thee, that as my outward man is comforted by the drinking of this
wine: so likewise, my inward man may be comforted and made strong by true faith
in the precious blood of thy most dear son. O Lord my heavenly, father, give me
thy holy spirit, which may so rule and govern my hart, that I never be
unthankful nor forgetful of this thine exceeding great kindness: But so train
my life according to thy blessed will, that what soever I do speak or think,
may be unto the glory of thy blessed name, and the health of my soul: thorough
Iesu Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For all them which lye in the extreme pangs of death or otherwise.
O Pitiful Phisicion and healer both of soul and body, Christ Iesu: Uouch safe
to cast thine eyes upon this poor sinful creature. N^ who lies here captive and
bou^d with sickness, turning his weakness to thy glory and to his health. And
bout safe good Lord, to send him patience and sufferance, that he may with a
true and perfect faith fight manfully against all te^tations of the Devil, that
he may no longer continue. So be it.

^ A confession for all people to be said in the morning.
O Merciful and most loving father, whose love is infinite, whose mercy
endurethe for ever: We sinful creatures trusting in thine unspeakable goodness,
and love towards vs, do appear this morning before thy divine majesty, most
lowly confessing our manifold sins and in innumerable transgressions of thy
commandments and fatherly will. Against thee only against thee, O Lord, have we
sinned, therefore we confess our sins, we knowledge our offences, we accuse our
selves unto the O merciful Lord, and will not hied our unrighteousness. We find
in our selves nothing but ignorance of thy will, disobedience, mistrust,
doubtfulness in thy goodness, incredulity, hatred, and con tempt of al
spiritual things, selfloue, con fidence in our selves, and f^ruent lusting
after carnal things of this world. And this tree of our corrupt nature, brings
forth continually in vs none other fruit, but rotten and unsavoury works of the
flesh, in thoughts, words* and doings, unto condemnation. Wherefore, we humbly
beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy son Iesus christ's sake, whom thou
hast set forth for a purchaser to^wardes vs of mercy through faith in his
blood: to make our hearts clean: Take away our stony hearts, and give unto vs a
true and a lively taith, whichshal work continually by love, through Christ.
Have mercy upon vs, forgive vs our sins, for thy sons sake: Certify our
co^science of remission of the same, by thy holy spirit, by whose operation we
may so mortify in vs our old man the whole body of sin that we continually
dying unto sin, may walk in newnes of life, to the glory of thy name, through
Iesus Christ our lord. So be it.

Then say this 86. Psalm treatably.
BOw down thine ear O Lord, and hear me, for I am pore and in misery.

O preserve my soul, for I am holy: my God save thy servant, that puts his
trust in thee.

Be merciful unto me (O Lord) for I will call daily upon thee.

Comfort the soul of thy servant, unto thee O lord, do I lift up my soul.

For thou lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that cal
upon thee.

Give ear Lord to my prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires.

In the time of my trouble, I will cal up on thee, for thou hear me.

Among the Gods there is none like un to thee O lord, there is not one that can
do as thou doest.

Al nations whom thou hast made, shall come worship thee, O lord: and shall
glorify thy name.

For thou art great and doest wondrous things, thou art God alone.

Teach me thy way O lord, and I will walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto
thee, that it may fear thy name.

I will thank thee, O Lord my god with all my heart, and will praise thy name
for ever.

For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou hast delivered my soul from the
neithermost hell.

O God, the proud are risen against me, and the congregations of naughty men,
have not set thee before their eyes.

But thou O lord god art full of compassion and mercy, long suffering,
plenteous in goodness, and truth.

O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thine handmaid.

Show some toke^ upon me for good, that they which hate me may se it, and bee a
shamed, because thou Lord haste helped me, and comforted me.

Glory be to the father, and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning. andc.

Lord have mercy upon vs.

Christ have mercy upon vs.

Lord have mercy upon vs.

Then say the Cred and the Lords prayer. andc.

Lord show thy mercy upon vs.

And grant vs thy salvation.

O lord save the Queen.

And mercifully hear vs when we cal upon thee

Endue thy ministers with righteousness.

And make thy chosen people joyful.

O Lord save thy people.

And bless thine heritaunce.

Give peace in our time O lord.

Because there is none other that fights for vs, but only thou O god.

O god make clean our hearts within vs.

And take not thy holy spirit from vs. Let vs pray.
O God which art author of peace and lover of concorde, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom: defend vs thy humble
servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surly trusting in thy defence,
may not fear the power of any ad uersaryes, thorough the might of Iesu Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord our heavenly father almighty and everlasting god, which hast safely
brought vs to the beginning of this day: defend vs in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither rune into any kind
of danger, but that al our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
GOd preserve Queen Elizabeth, god destroy al her enemies, God preserve her
most honourable counsellors, God aid the clergy with his spirit in setting
forth of his truth, God preserve al the nobility of this realm, and the commons
of the same, God defend the favourers of the gospel, God chau^ge the harts of
our enemies and send them better minds. The power of god destroy Antichrist
with al his wicked kingdom. God send the gospel a joyful and a free passage
throughout the whole world. God send unto all degrees such grace, that they may
walk worthily in their vocation and calling. Amen.

The peace of God which passes all understanding, keep our harts and minds in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his son Iesus Christ our Lord: And the
blessing of God almighty, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, be amongst
vs and remain with vs always

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath S. Martins.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


