The pitiful Spoil of Askot, by Don Join de Austria.
I May not seem so ungrateful unto you my loving friend, in recompense of your
great benefits which I have su^dry ways received from you, as not to certify
you of all such occurantes as here are reddy past. But from time to time, God
lending me life, I mind still as just occasion shall serve to signify unto you
how things here shall pass. You understand that on the sixth day of this month
of August, howe that the Vicount of Gaunt ( understanding that Don Iohn his
forces were retired towards Loin) besieged Askot with three thousand Soldiers
and 2. great pieces of Ordinance, and put to the Sword 200. Alboneys, and 500.
Almaynes and VVallons, Soldiers, who were there in garrison, which when the
Vicunt of Gaunt (had by the valiancy of English men and the Sckots slain so
many before specified) gave commandment that neither Burger nor Inhabitant
should be hurt, only their goods and munition for war, whose commandment was
accomplished, and as it is surely notified that the spoil of that Town is
valued too bee better worth to the Soldiers then five thousand pound, although
the same Town was but of very small countenance. When this exploit by our
Countrymen was finished they returned too their Camp again: Which when Don
Ihoan had intelligence hereof, hee went in parson to view the same, and found
as before is mentioned, being all bent with fury for that which had happened,
gave commandment to kill men, women, and Children, which was a great number,
and a sorrowful sight. Yet notwithstanding he was not so pacified, but also
caused the Town to be burnt and utterly defaced to the ground. Thus my beloved
I have certified you of the utter ruin of this little Town.

And furthermore, to let you understand, that on wednesday last, our
Ambassadors departed from Machelen towards Don Iohn, accompanied with certain
Lords of the Country, for the conclusion of a Peace (if it may be) according to
certain Articles which I send you herewith.

We hear not yet what is effected, a murmor of Peace here runs. But yet greatly
doubted: and that all is but practises, and the French thought to be all one
with Don Iohn.

The French Ambassador is returned, but not heard what hee hath brought with
him for news, being thought his coming to bee rather to get some conclusion of
his message, for the which he came first for his moister, to the end he might
be dispatched, then otherwise to venture him self longer here, fearing the
smoother and smoke is so sore seen and smelt, as the flame must needs ere long,
burst out.

The Duke Allonson florysheth at Mons, where he hath feasted all the Nobles and
Gentlemen. That place is sure enough for him: other Towns in Henego, will not
yet accept of him.

In Valencine (as men report) they have been in Arms, and fought together, but
wherefore, or who have gotten the better, is not yet here certainly known.

Cassimerus is now in the Camp with his Forces, where the Archduke Medias hath
been: And hee met Cassimerus before Leyre, and so returned to the Town, and
dined together.

Now it is thought, that the Camp shall presently marche, either to the siege
of some Town, that Don Iohn holds, or else to follow his sorces, until they
meet with him.

There is money, Municion, and all other kind of Furniture, sent to the Camp of
the States to maintain the Soldiers the better.

Don Iohn for certain, hath a great number of Spaniards, and Italians, coming
unto him, which by report hath been seen Marching in Piemont, and are about
right, or ten thousand.

The.13. of Ague. 1578.
The Articles which are given by the States to the Ambassadors of the Queens
Majesty of England, and certain other Lords of the Country, by them to be
agreed upon, with Don Iohn de Austria, between the.22. of August, and the.3. of
September next.1578.

IN Primis, to forget all that is past.

To confirm or allow the administration of the States, from the entering of the
said Don Iohn, in the Castle of Namur.

That he shall depart with his Adherents and Allies, except those of the
Country.

To render the Provinces, or Countries into the hands of the States.

That within this month of August, he shall render and restore the Cities on
this side the Maze: that is; Deuenter; L^borche, and Remmond.

The Duke Medias shall remain Governor.

The States in general, and particular, shall hold and keep their aucthorities,
under the obeisance and homage of his Majesty.

Those of Burgondy and Luxenbaurge shall be bound to maintain the pacification
of Gaunt.

Touching the Religion, men shall govern them selves after the best manner as
shall be possible, according to the necessity of the Countries, and Provinces
shall require.

An Prisoners to bee released.

No Governor to bee put in these Countries, without the consent of the States.

That the Princes, and others confederated, shall be comprehended in the Peace.

Imprinted by W. B.


