The WAY TO KEEP HIM.
ACT. I. SCENE I.
A PLAGUE on it!-- I've turned out my Game, -- Is Forty-seven good?--


Serve Equal.--


A Plague go with it-- Tearse to a Queen! --


Serve Equal.--


I've ruined my Game, and be hanged to me. --I don't believe there's a Footman
in England plays with worse Luck than myself.--Four Aces is Fourteen!


Serve That's hard; --Cruel, by Jupiter!


Four Aces is Fourteen -- Fifteen


Serve There's your Equality.--


Very well--Sixteen --Seventeen


There's a couple of you, indeed!--You're so fond of the Vices of your Betters,
that you're scarce out of your Beds, when you must pretend to imitate them and
their Ways, forsooth.--


Prithee, be quiet, Woman, do.--Eighteen --


Set you up indeed, Mr. Coxcomb.--


Nineteen! Clubs


Have done with your Foolery, will ye?--And send my Mistress word--


Hold your Tongue, Mrs. Muslin, you'll put us out.--What shall I play?--I'll
tell you, Woman, my Master and I desire to have nothing to say to you or your
Mistress.--Twenty; Diamonds!


But I tell you, Mr, Sauce-box, that my Lady desires to know when your Master
came home last Night, and how he is this Morning?


Prithee, be quiet.--I and my Master, are resolved to be teased no more by
you.--And so, Mrs. Go-Between, you may return as you came.--What the Devil
shall I play?--We'll have nothing to do with you, I tell you.--


You'll have nothing to do with us!--But you shall have to do with us, or I'll
know the Reason why.--


Death and Fury!--This meddling Woman has destroyed my whole Game.--


Now, Sir, will you be so obliging as to send my Mistress an Answer to her
Questions, how and when your rake-helly Master came home last Night?--


I'll tell you what, Mrs. Muslin, --you and my Master, will be the Death of me
at last; that's what you will.--In the Name of Charity, what do you both take
me for?--Whatever Appearances may be, I am but of mortal Mould.--Nothing
supernatural about me.--


Upon my Word, Mr. PowderPuff!--


I have not indeed!--And so, do you see, Flesh and Blood can't hold it
always.--I can't be for ever a Slave to your Whims, and your second-hand
Airs.--


Second-hand Airs!--


Yes, second-hand Airs! You take 'em at your Lady's Toilets with their cast
Gowns, and so you descend to us with them, --And then, on the other hand,
there's my Master!--Because he chooses to live upon the Principal of his
Health, and so run out his whole Stock as fast as he can, he must have the
Pleasure of my Company with him in his Devil's Dance to the other World.--Never
at home, till Three, Four, Five, Six in the Morning!--


Ay, a vile, ungrateful Man, to have so little Regard for a Wife that dotes
upon him.--And your Love for me is all of a Piece.--I've no Patience with you
both.--A couple of false, perfidious, abandoned, profligate--


Hey, hey, --Where's your Tongue running?--My Master is, as the World goes, a
good Sort of a civil Kind of a Husband, and I, --Heav'n help me, --a poor
Simpleton of an amorous, constant Puppy, that bears with all the Follies of his
little Tyrant here.--Come and kiss me, you Jade, come and kiss me.--


Paws off, Caesar. --Don't think to make me your Dupe.-- I know, when you go
with him to this new Lady, this Bath Acquaintance; and I know you're as false
as my Master, and give all my Dues to your Mrs. Mignionet there.--


Hush, Not a Word of that.--I'm ruined, pressed, and sent on board a Tender
directly, if you blab that I trusted you with that Secret.--But to charge me
with Falsehood, --Injustice and Ingratitude! My Master, to be sure, does drink
an agreeable Dish of Tea with the Widow.--Has been there every Night this Month
past.--How long it will last, Heaven knows!--But thither he goes, and I attend
him.--I ask my Master, Sir, says I, what Time would you please to want me?--He
gives me his Answer, and then I strut by Mrs. Mignionet, without much as
tipping her one Glance; she stands watering at the Mouth, and a pretty Fellow
that, says she.--Ay, ay, gaze on, says I, gaze on; -- I see what you would be
at:--You'd be glad to have me, -- You'd be glad to have me! -- But sour Grapes,
my Dear! I'll go home and cherish my own lovely Wanton; -- and so I do, you
know. I do. -- Then after Toying with thee, I hasten back to my Master; later
indeed than he desires, but always too soon for him. -- He's loath to part; He
lingers and dangles, and I stand cooling my Heels.-- O! to the Devil I pitch
such a Life.--


Why don't you strive to reclaim the vile Man then?


Softly, not so fast;--I have my Talent to be sure! yes, yes, I have my Talent;
some Influence over my Master's Mind: But can you suppose, that I have Power to
turn the Drift of his Inclinations, and lead him as I please--and to whom?--to
his Wife!Pshaw!--Ridiculous,--foolish, and absurd!


Mighty well, Sir! Can you proceed?


I tell you a Wife is out of Date, now a Days; -- Time was -- but that's all
over--a Wife's a Drug now; mere Tar-Water, with every Virtue under Heaven, but
nobody takes it.--


Well, I swear, I could slap your impudent Face.--


Come and kiss me, I say.--


A Fiddlestick for your Kisses,-- while you encourage your Master to open
Rebellion against the best of Wives.--


I tell you it's her own Fault; why don't she strive to please him, as you do
me? Come, throw your Arms about my Neck.--


Ay, as I used to do, Mr. Brazen!


Then must I force you to your own Good-- --Pregnant with Delight! Egad if my
Master was not in the next Room--


Hush! My Mistress's Bell rings,-- how long has he been up?


He has been up--He has been up--'Sdeath you've set me all on Fire.--


There, there,--the Bell rings again--Let me be gone--


At Five this Morning, rubbed his Forehead, damned himself for a Blockhead,
went to Bed in a peevish Humour, and is now in tip-top Spirits with Sir
Brilliant Fashion, in the next Room.


Oh Lute! That Bell rings again-- There, there, let me be gone.


There goes high and low Life contrasted in one Person;--Tis well I have not
told her the whole of my Master's Secrets: She'll blab that he visits this
Widow from Bath. --But if they enquire, they'll be told he does not; the Plot
lies deeper than they think, and so they'll only get into a Puzzle. -- So, my
Master's Bell rings too.--


-- This Trash of Tea!-- I don't know why I drink so much of it. -- Heigh ho!
-- I wonder what keeps Muslin -- do you step Child, with my Compliments to your
Master, and let him know, I shall be glad of his Company to a Dish of Tea this
Morning.--


Yes, Ma'am.--


Surely, never was any poor Woman treated with such cruel Indifference; nay,
with such an open undisguised Insolence of Gallantry.


Well, Muslin, have you seen his Prime Minister?--


Yes, Ma'am, I have seen Mr. William, and he says, as how my Master came home
according to Custom, at Five this Morning, and in a huge Pickle.--He's now at
Breakfast, and has Sir Brilliant Fashion with him.


Is he there again?


He is Ma'am; and as I passed by Master's Study, I overheard them both laughing
as loud as any thing, --


About some precious Mischief; I'll be sworn; and all at my Cost too! --Heigh
ho!


Dear Ma'am, why will you chagrin yourself about a vile Man, that is not
worth,--no, as I live and breathe,--not worth a single Sigh?--


What can I do, Muslin?


Do, Ma'am! Lard!--If I was as you, I'd do for him;--As I'm a living Christian,
I would.--If I could not cure my Grief, I'd find some Comforts, that's what I
would.


Heigh ho! -- I have no Comfort. --


No Comfort, Ma'am? -- Whose Fault then?-- Would any Body but you, Ma'am?-- It
provokes me to think of it, -- Would any body, Ma'am; young and handsome as you
are, with so many Accomplishments, Ma'am, sit at home here, as melancholy as a
poor Servant out of Place?--And all this for what?-- Why for a Husband, and
such a Husband!-- What do you think the World will say of you, Ma'am, if you go
on this way?


I care not what they say, -- I am tired of the World, and the World may be
tired of me, if it will: -- My Troubles are my own only, and I must endeavour
to bear them. -- Who knows what Patience may do?--If Mr. Lovemore has any
Feeling left, my Resignation may some Day or other have its Effect, and incline
him to do me Justice.


But, dear Ma'am, that's waiting for dead Men's Shoes, -- Incline him to do you
Justice! --What signifies expecting and expecting.--Give me a Bird in the
Hand.-- Lard, Ma'am, to be for ever pining and grieving!--Dear Heart!--If all
the Women in London, in your Case, were to sit down and die of the Spleen, what
would become of all the public Places?--They might turn vauxhall to a
Hop-Garden, make a Brew-house of Ranelagh, and let both the Playhouses to a
Methodist Preacher. We should not have the Racketing with 'em we have now.--
John, -- John, Trumpabout -- John, Cat-Gut, Opera.-- John, Varney, Play.--No
--They whisk about the Town, and rantipole it with as unconcerned Looks, and as
florid Outsides, as if they were treated at home like so many Goddesses, though
every Body knows Possession has ungoddessed them all long ago, and their
Husbands care no more for them,--no by Jingo, no more than they do for their
Husbands.--


Love. You run on at a strange Rate.--


tic enough to make a Body run on.--If every Body thought like you.--


Love. If every Body loved like me.--


A Brass Thimble for Love, if it is not answered by Love.--What the Deuce is
here to do?--Shall I go and fix my Heart upon a Man, that shall despise me for
that very Reason, and, "Ay," says he, -- inconvenient married -- And then, when
he's going a roguing, smiles impudently in your Face, and, -- Fie upon 'em!--I
know 'em all.--Give me a Husband that will enlarge the Circle of my innocent
Pleasures:--But a Husband now a days, Ma'am, is no such a thing.--A Husband
now,--as I hope for Mercy, is nothing at all but a Scare-Crow, to show you the
Fruit, but touch it if you dare.--A Husband -- the Devil take 'em all all
--Lord forgive one for swearing--is nothing at all but a Bug-Bear, a
Snap-Dragon; a Husband, Ma'am, is --


Love. Prithee, Peace with your Tongue, and see what keeps that Girl.--


Yes, Ma'am, --Why, Jenny, -- why don't you come up to my Mistress?-- What do
you stand a gossiping there for?-- A Husband, Ma'am, is a mere Monster;-- that
is to say, if one makes him so; then, for certain, he is a Monster indeed;--and
if one does not make him so, then he behaves like a Monster; and of the two
Evils, by my Troth --Ma'am, was you ever at the Play of Catherine and Mercutio?
--The vile Man calls his Wife his Goods, and his Cattle, and his Household
Stuff. -- There you may see, Ma'am, what a Husband is, --a Husband is --But
here comes one will tell you -- Here comes Sir Brilliant Fashion. -- Ask his
Advice, Ma'am.


Love. His Advice!--Ask Advice of the Man who has estranged Mr. Lovemore 's
Affections from me!


Well, I protect and vow, Ma'am, I think Sir Brilliant a very pretty Gentleman.
--He's the very Pink of the Fashion;--He dresses fashionably, lives
fashionably, wins your Money fashionably, loses his own fashionably, and does
every thing fashionably; and then, he is so lively, and talks so lively, and so
much to say, and so never at a Loss. -- But here he comes.


Brill. Mrs. Lovemore, your most obedient very humble Servant. -- But, my dear
Madam, what always in a vis-a-vis Party with your Suivante! --You will afford
me your Pardon, my dear Ma'am, if I avow that this does a little wear the
Appearance of Misanthropy.


Love. Far from it, Sir Brilliant -- We were engaged in your Panegyric. --


Brill. My Panegyric! -- Then am I come most apropos to give a helping Hand
towards making it complete.--Mr. Lovemore will kiss your Hand presently, Ma'am;
-- He has not as yet entirely adjusted his Dress. --In the mean Time, I can, if
you please, help you to some Anecdotes, which will perhaps enable you to colour
your Canvass a little higher.


Love. I hope you will be sure, among those Anecdotes, not to omit the
egregious Exploit of seducing Mr. Lovemore entirely from his Wife.


Brill. I, Ma'am! -- Let me perish, Madam--


Love. Oh! Sir, I am no Stranger to--


Brill. May Fortune eternally forsake me, and Beauty frown on me, if ever--


Love. Don't protest too strongly, Sir Brilliant --


Brill. May I never hold four by Honours--


Love. Nay, but Sir.--


Brill. Ma'am, I am altogether struck with Amazement. -- May I never taste the
dear Delight of breaking a Pharaoh Bank, or bullying the whole Room at a
Brag-Party, if ever I was, in Thought, Word, or Deed, accessory to his
Infidelity.--I deny all unlawful Confederacy.--


Love. Oh! Sir, it is in vain to deny.


Brill. Nay, but my dear Mrs. Lovemore, give me leave.--I alienate the
Affections of Mr. Lovemore! --Consider, Madam, how would this tell in
Westminster-Hall. -- Sir Brilliant Fashion, How say you, guilty of this
Indictment or not guilty?--Not guilty, poss.--Thus issue is joined;--you enter
the Court, and in sober Sadness charge the whole plump upon me, without a Word
as to the how, when, and where;--No Proof positive, --there ends the
Prosecution.


Love. But, Sir, your stating of the Case--


Brill. Dear Ma'am, don't interrupt.--


Love. Let me explain this Matter.--


Brill. Nay, Mrs. Lovemore, allow me fair Play.--I am now upon my Defence.--
You will please to consider, Gentlemen of the Jury, that Mr. Lovemore is not a
Ward, nor I a Guardian; that he is his own Master to do as he pleases; that Mr.
Lovemore is fond of Gaiety, Pleasure, and Enjoyment; that he knows how to live,
and if he does not like the Bill of Fare that is catered for him at home, he
very naturally goes abroad to seek for something more palatable.

How say ye?--Gentlemen of the Jury?-- Not guilty.-- There, Ma'am, you see, Not
guilty.


Love. You run on finely, Sir Brilliant; --but don't imagine that this
bantering Way --


Brill. Acquitted by my Country, Ma'am, you see, -- fairly acquitted! --


Love. Be it so then.--But you hinted something about Mr. Lovemore 's not
liking his Bill of Fare at home, -- I should be glad you would explain that
Matter, Sir--


Brill. Right, Madam, very right: -- I did touch upon that Head. -- It was but
slightly-- I did not care, in an open Court, to enlarge further upon that
Matter.-- But to be plain, upon my Word, Mrs. Lovemore, for a fine Woman like
you to be the Dupe of your own false Delicacy, an old fashioned Kind of
Sentiment, a vulgar Prejudice, proscribed by Custom long ago; an antiquated
Principle of I know not what:-- Renounce it altogether-- vivas Ma'am,-- do like
other People of Condition; mix with other amiable Ladies, who know how to use
the Senses Nature has given them; pluck the Fruit that grows around ye, and bid
adieu to the Reign of the melancholy Pleasures for ever.


Love. After the very edifying Counsel you give Mr. Lovemore, this loose Strain
of yours, Sir Brilliant, is not at all surprising;-- and, Sir, your late
Project:--


Brill. My late Project! --


Love. Yes, Sir: Not content with leading Mr. Lovemore into a thousand
Dissipations from all conjugal Affection and domestic Happiness, you have
lately introduced him to your Mrs. Bellmour. --


Brill. Ma'am, he does not so much as know Mrs. Bellmour.


Love. Fie upon it, Sir Brilliant! -- Falsehood is but a poor--


Brill. Falsehood I disdain, Ma'am,-- and I Sir Brilliant Fashion declare, that
Mr. Lovemore, your Husband, is not acquainted with the Widow Bellmour; -- and
if he was acquainted? --What then? -- No ill Consequence could from thence
redound to you.-- You don't know that Lady, Ma'am. -- But I'll let you into her
whole History, -- her whole History, Ma'am:-- Pray be seated. The Widow
Bellmour's History, is this;-- She is one of those Ladies--

-- William! Is the Chariot at the Door?


Brill. We are interrupted.--


Very well,--let the Chariot be brought round directly.--How do you do this
Morning, my Dear? Sir Brilliant, I beg your Pardon.--How do you do my Dear?--


Love. Only a little indisposed in Mind, and Indisposition of the Mind is of no
sort of Consequence; not worth a Cure.--


I beg your Pardon, Mrs. Lovemore; Indisposition of the Mind. -- Sir Brilliant,
that is really a mighty pretty Ring you have on your Finger.--


Brill. A Bauble: Will you look at it?


Love. Though I have but few Obligations to Sir Brilliant, yet I fancy I may
ascribe to him the Favour of this Visit, Mr. Lovemore.


-- Nay, now positively you wrong me;--I was obliged to you for your civil
Enquiries concerning me this Morning, and so on my Part, I came to return the
Compliment before I go abroad.-- Upon my Word it is very prettily set.--


Love. Are you going abroad, Sir?--


A Matter of Business;--I hate Business--but Business must be done.-- --Pray is
there any News? --any News, my Dear?--


Love. It would be News to me, Sir, if you would be kind enough to let me know
whether I may expect the Favour of your Company to Dinner.


It would be impertinent in me to answer such a Question, because I can give no
direct positive Answer to it; -- as Things happen, -- perhaps I may, -- perhaps
may not. -- But don't let me be of any Inconvenience to you; -- it is not
material where a body eats. -- Can I set you down any where, Sir Brilliant?


Brill. I thank you, no-- my Chariot's in waiting.-- I have some Visits to
make, and shall rattle half the Town over presently.


As you will-- a ca, your Servant,-- Mrs. Lovemore. -- My Dear, --I kiss your
Hand.--Who waits there?--


Brill. When, and where?


A Word in your Ear, --Ma'am with your Permission.--


Love. That cold, contemptuous Civility, Mr. Lovemore --


Pshaw!-- Prithee now,--How can you, my Dear? -- That's very peevish now, and
ill-natured.--It is but about a mere Trifle.-- Hark ye, played for after you
went, -- the Foreigner, and he, understand one another. -- I beg Pardon, Ma'am,
it was only about an Affair at the Opera.


Love. The Opera, Mr. Lovemore, or any thing, is more agreeable than my
Company.


You wrong me now, I declare you wrong me; -- and if it will give you any
Pleasure, I'll sup at home. -- Can't we meet at the St. Alban 's to Night? --


Love. I believe I need not tell you what Pleasure that would give me: But
unless the Pleasure is mutual, Mr. Lovemore --


Ma'am I -- I -- I perceive all the Delicacy of that Sentiment; -- But -- a --
a I shall incommode you, -- you possibly may have some private Party -- and it
would be very impolite in me, to obstruct your Sehemes of Pleasure. -- Would it
not, Sir Brilliant?


Brill. It would be gothic to the last Degree.-- Ha! ha!


Ha! ha! -- To be sure, for me to be of the Party, would look as if we lived
together like our Friend Sir Jealous Hotbrain and his scolding Wife, who are
for ever like two Game-Cocks, ready armed to goad and wound one another most
heartily.--Ha! ha!


Brill. The very Thing.--Ha! ha!


So it is, -- so it is.


Love. Very well, Gentlemen; you have it all to yourselves.


Odso! -- Any Commands into the City, Madam? --


Love. Commands! -- I have no Commands, Sir.


I have an Appointment there at my Banker's; -- Sir Brilliant, you know old
Discount? --


Brill. What, he that was in Parliament? --


The same; --

I think, was the Name of the Borough. -- Ha! ha! ha! -- Ma'am, your most
obedient; --Sir Brilliant, yours. -- Who waits there; -- no Ceremony. -- Your
Servant.


Brill. Bon Voyage! --


Did you call, Ma'am?


Love. Come hither, Muslin; -- say.--


I'll do it, Madam; I'll do it.


Love. He's gone to visit this Mrs. Bellmour, I suppose. --


Brill. Dear Ma'am, how can you take such a Notion in your Head? -- But apropos
-- that brings us back to the little History I was just going to give you of
the Widow Bellmour. --


Love. Proceed, Sir.


Brill. The Widow Bellmour, Ma'am, is a Lady, who to all the Charms of external
Beauty, has added such an Elegance of Understanding, and such a Vivacity of
Wit, that it is no Wonder all the pretty Fellows are on their Knees to her. --
Her Person youthful, blooming, and graceful; -- and then her Manner! -- And so
entertaining! -- Such Quickness in her Transition from one thing to another;
and every thing she does, does so become her! -- Does she sit still? it is an
indolent Venus before ye, -- Does she move? it is Beauty walking in conscious
Triumph! To see her smile, and hear her talk,--I shall glow up into Rapture,
and fall a raving if I talk a Moment longer about her.--


Love. Pray, finish your Picture, Sir.--


Brill It is from the real Life, I assure ye.--In short, Ma'am, she is a Lady
that has been abroad, has ever kept the best Company, and has such a Variety of
Talents, that Upon my Soul, she knows the whole Theory of agreeable Sensations
better than all the Philosophers in Europe. --


Love. And to this Theory, she has joined the Practice, I presume.--


Brill. She has. --


Love. I imagined as much.--


Brill. Ma'am!--


Love. You need not affect to be surprised, Sir, -- there is no mighty Secret
in the Affair. -- My Accounts of the Lady inform me, that she is as you say,
young and handsome; has lived a great deal Abroad, buried her Husband there, is
lately come to Town, has taken a House, -- lives at great Expense, receives all
the Men of Rank and Fortune. -- We all know what the World is apt to infer from
these Appearances.--


Brill. I am no Stranger to the Way of the World. -- Every Object has its
different Aspects, its Side-lights; and the World is generally good-natured
enough to fix upon the most unfavourable Points of View.


Love. So then, this is another antiquated Prejudice of mine.


Brill. Nothing more certain.--


Love. Oh! mighty well, Sir! --She is a very Vestal; -- come, exhibit your
Portrait. --A Vestal from your School of Painting will, no doubt, be very
curious.--


Brill. My dear Madam, consider what you are saying! -- What is your Charge
against this Lady? That she is amiable! -- Surely Mrs. Lovemore should be the
last Person in the World, to reproach her with a Quality, which so eminently
possesses herself.


Love. The Gallantry of that Compliment, Sir Brilliant, added to your other
Favours --


Brill. What next? -- That she has agreeable Talents! -- What then? As Nature
is liberal of Talents to but very few, she makes a kind of Recompense to those
who have none, by conducing to their Entertainment.--But she is young and
handsome!--So perishable a Quality might, methinks, be suffered to bloom
without Reproach.--Ay, but she has taken a House, and sees Company.--It is what
she is entitled to, and a fine Picture should be seen by People of Rank and
Taste;-- and surely, Madam, your Sex entrenches upon your own Happiness, by not
allowing that a Woman may partake of the innocent Pleasures of Life, unless she
has resigned her Person to a Man, and parted with her Liberty!--


Love. And so you would persuade me that Mr. Lovemore is not acquainted with
her?--


Brill. Absolutely ignorant of him!-- and I'll tell you further, she has such a
Generosity of Temper, and such a feeling Heart, that were she to know him, and
to know that his Visits gave you Pain, she would never be at home for him
again.--


Love. Then give me leave, Sir -- If you have so exalted an Opinion of the
Lady, how comes it that you desist from paying your Addresses in that
Quarter?--


Brill. Compulsion, Ma'am,--it is not voluntary. -- The Garrison, I thought,
was upon the Point of surrendering, but up came my Lord Etheridge with his
honourable Forces to relieve the Town.--I thought he was out of the Kingdom,
but it seems he is returned. -- I bribed the Chambermaid yesterday, and I find
he has supplanted me; and so all that remains for me, is to do justice to the
Lady, and console myself in the best way I can for my Demerits; and the
Insufficiency of my Pretensions.--


Love. And am I really to believe all this?--


Brill. May the first Woman I put the Question to, strike me to the Center with
a supercilious Eyebrow, if every Syllable is not minutely true,--so that you
see, Ma'am, I am not the Cause of your Inquietude. -- There is not on Earth a
Man that could be more averse from such a thing,--nor a Person in the World,
who more earnestly aspires to prove the tender Esteem he bears ye,--and,
Ma'am,--I have long panted for an Opportunity.--By all that's soft she hears
me. -- I have long panted, Ma'am, for a tender Moment like this,--with all the
Ardor of Love, which Charms like yours alone could kindle.-- Expense of my
Life-- --You see, my dear Ma'am, we both have Cause of Discontent; we are both
disappointed,--both crossed in Love,--and so, Ma'am, the least we can do is,
both heartily to join to sweeten each other's Cares.


Love. Sir Brilliant, I don't understand


Brill. If you will pour the Balm of Love on this poor wounded Heart, you may
have the most delicious Revenge against a Husband,--who,--from his own perverse
Inclination, his own Inhumanity of Temper,--has for a long time,--I have seen
it, Madam,--with Vexation seen it, --Yes,--he has long been false to Honour,
Love, and you.--


Love. This Usage, Sir, -- you take my Wrongs too much to Heart, Sir, -- --I
myself, Sir, can remedy my own Afflictions.--But this Presumption of
yours,--upon my word! --This is the most unparallelled.--


Brill. Pray, Ma'am, don't break your Fan,--don't break it, Ma'am,--I beg you
won't.--


Love. This is the most affronting,-- Come to a fine Pass, indeed!-- --
Intolerable Assurance!--


Brill. Now am I in a sweet Condition. --The Poet has touched it most
exquisitely.--


Love. Sir, I must desire you will quit my House immediately.--


Brill. Don't overheat yourself, --consider, my dear Madam.--


Love. Sir, I desire --was ever such Rudeness!--


Brill. Ma'am, I desist,--I have done, --but when you're in a better Humour,
pray recollect.--


Love. Will no body answer there?


Brill. I retire.--

"Those eyes that tell us what the Sun is made of;--
"Those Hills of driven Snow.--

Brill. Ma'am, your most obedient.--


Did you call, Ma'am?


Love. To show the Gentleman out.--


The Servants are all in the Hall.


Love. To be insulted thus by his loose confident Carriage!--


As I live and breathe, Ma'am, if I was as you, I would not flutter myself
about it.--


Love. About what?


La!--what signifies mincing Matters?--I overheard it all.


Love. You did;--did you?


Ma'am!--


Love. It does not signify at present.--


No, Ma'am, it does not signify, and Revenge is sweet, I think; and by my
Troth, I don't see why you should stand on Ceremony with a Husband that stands
upon none with you.


Love. Again--prithee, Mrs. Malapert, none of your Advice.--How dare yon talk
in this manner to me?--Let me hear no more of this impertinent Freedom.--


No, Ma'am. -- Its very well, Ma'am.--I have done, Ma'am. -- --What the Devil
is here to do?--An unmannerly thing to go for to huss me in this manner!--


Love. Aversion.-- Lawyers, Parting, and separate Maintenance would ensue. --
No, -- I must avoid that,--if possible; I will avoid that.-- What must be done?
--


What can she be thinking of now? --The sulky thing, not to be communicative
with such a Friend as I am!--What can she mean?--Did you speak to me, Ma'am?--


Love. Suppose I were to try that!-- Muslin.


Ma'am!--Now for it--


Love. Did John follow your Master's Chariot, as I ordered?


He did, Ma'am.


Love. Where is he?


He's below, Ma'am; -- he followed it as far as the Chocolate House in St.
James's-Street.


Love. Are you sure of that?


You may rely upon it.


Love. You heard Sir Brilliant deny that Mr. Lovemore visits at this Widow
Bellmours.


Lard, Ma'am, he's as full of Fibs as a French Milliner,--he does visit
there,-- I know it all from William, -- I'll be hanged in my own Garters if he
does not.


Love. I know not what to do! -- Heigho! -- I think I'll venture. -- Let my
Chair be got ready instantly.


Your Chair, Ma'am! --Are you going out, Ma'am?


Love. Don't tease me with your talk, but do as I bid you,--and bring my
Capuchin down to the Parlour immediately.


What is in the Wind now?--An ill-natured Puss, not to tell me what she is
about!--It's no matter,--she does not know what she is about. -- Before I'd
lead such a Life, I'd take a Lover's Leap into Rosamond's Pond.--I love to see
Company for my Part. --But, Lord bless me! I had like to have forgot,--Mrs.
Sugar-Key comes to my Rout to-Night.--I had as live she had staid away, --She's
nothing but mere Lumber!--so formal, that she won't play above a
Shilling-Whist.--How the Devil does she think I'm to make a Shilling Party for
her?--There's no such a thing to be done nowadays,--No Body plays
Shilling-Whist now.


End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Oh! blessed with Temper, whose unclouded Ray,
Can make To-morrow, cheerful as To-day;
She who can own a Sister's Charms, and hear
Sighs for a Daughter, with unwonted Ear;
That never answers till a Husband cools,
And if she rules him, never shows she rules;
Sensible, elegant Pope!

Charms by accepting, by submitting sways,
Yet has her Humour most when she obeys;

Meg Lord love my Mistress! -- She's always so happy, and so gay. --


Bell. These charming Characters of Women! -- It is like a Painter's Gallery,
where one sees the Portraits of all one's Acquaintance!--Here, Mignionet, put
this Book in its Place.


Meg Yes, Ma'am. -- There Ma'am, you see your Toilette looks most charmingly.


Bell. Does it? -- I think it does. -- Apropos, whore's my new Song? -- Here it
lies, -- I must make myself Mistress of it.-- -- I believe I shall conquer it
presently, -- This Hair of mine is always tormenting me; -- always in Disorder,
and straggling out of its Place: -- I must absolutely subdue this Lock. --
Mignionet, do you know that this is a very pretty Song? -- it is written by my
Lord Etheridge; -- I positively must learn it before he comes. -- --Do you
know, Mignionet, that I think my Lord not wholly intolerable?


Meg Yes, Ma'am, I know that.


Bell. Do you?


Meg And if I have any Skill, Ma'am, I fancy you think him more than tolerable.


Bell. Really! then you think I like him, I suppose.--Do ye think I like him?--
I don't well know how that is, -- and yet I don't know but I do like
him;--no,--no,-- I don't like him neither, -- not absolutely like; -- but I
could like, if I had a mind to humour myseif.--The Man has a Softness of
Manner, an elegant Turn of Thinking, and has a Heart -- has he a Heart? -- yes,
I think he has; -- and then he is such an Observer of the Manners,--and shows
the ridiculous of them with so much Humour --


Meg I'll be whipped, if you don't get into the Noose before the long Nights
are over.-- Without doubt, Ma'am, my Lord is a pretty Man enough;--but
lack-a-day, what o'that?-- You know but very little of him, -- your
Acquaintance is but very short;-- Madam, mind what I say, -- for I am at times
I assure you, very speculative, -- very speculative indeed;--and I see very
plainly.--Lord, Ma'am, what am I doing! -- I'm talking to you for your own
good, and you're all in the Air, and no more mind one, no, no more, than if I
was nothing at all.


Bell. indeed you talk wonderfully well upon the Subject; but as I know how the
Cards lie, and can play the Game myself, and as I don't know my Song, -- why
a-body is inclined to give that the Preference.


Meg Ma'am I assure you, I am none of those Servants that bargain for their
Mistress's Inclinations;--but I see you are going to take a Leap in the Dark.
-- I don't know what to make of his manner of coming here, with his Chair
always brought into the Hall, and the Curtains drawn close about his Ears, as
if -- May I never be married, if I don't believe there is something amiss in
the Affair. -- Dear Heart, Ma'am, if you won't listen to me, what signifies my
living with you? -- I am of no Service to you. --


Bell. I believe I have conquered the Song;-- To-day?-- Well enough, I
think,--Do you think I shall play the Fool, Mignionet, and marry my Lord?


Meg You have it, Ma'am, through the very Heart of you,--I see that.


Bell. Do you think so? -- May be I may marry, and may be not. -- Poor Sir
Brilliant Fashion, --what will become of him? But I won't think about it.


Bell. What's the Matter, Pompey?


There's a Lady below in a Chair, that desires to know if you are at home,
Madam.


Bell. Has the Lady no Name?


She did not tell her Name.


Bell. How awkward you are!--Well show her up.


Meg Had not you better receive the Lady in the Dining-Room, Ma'am? -- Things
here are in such Confusion.--


Brill. No, twill do very well here. I dare say it is some body I am intimate
with, though the Boy does not recollect her Name.--Here she comes.


Bell. Ma'am your most obedient,--


Love. Ma'am I beg your Pardon for this Intrusion.--


Bell. Pray Ma'am walk in, --won't you please to be seated? -- Mignionet reach
a Chair.


Love. This Chair will do mighty well.


Bell. I beg you'll sit from the Door,-- I beg you'll sit here, Ma'am.--


Love. I'm afraid this Visit from one unknown to you, will be inconvenient and
troublesome.


Bell. Not at all, I dare say; -- you need not be at the Trouble of an
Apology:-- Would you choose a Dish of Chocolate?


Love. Much obliged to you, Not any.


Bell. Mignionet, you may withdraw.


Love. Though I have not the Pleasure of your Acquaintance, Ma'am, there is a
particular Circumstance which has determined me to take this Liberty with you;
for which I entreat your Pardon beforehand.


Bell. The Request is wholly unnecessary;--but a particular Circumstance, you
say.--Pray Ma'am, to what Circumstance am I indebted for this Honour?


Love. I shall appear perhaps very ridiculous, and indeed I am afraid I have
done the most absurd Thing.--But Ma'am, from the Character you bear for
Tenderness of Disposition, and Generosity of Sentiment, I easily incline to
flatter myself, that you will not take Offence at any thing; and that if it is
in your Power, you will afford me your Assistance.


Bell. You may depend upon me.


Love. I will be very ingenuous; -- Pray Ma'am, an't you acquainted with a
Gentleman whose Name is Lovemore?


Bell. Lovemore! -- No, -- no such Person in my List. -- Lovemore! -- I don't
know him, Ma'am.


Love. Ma'am I beg your Pardon, -- I am but where I was.--I won't trouble you
any further,


Bell. It is mighty odd, this. -- -- Pray Ma'am, give me leave -- I beg you
will sit down,--pray don't think me impertinent--may I beg to know who the
Gentleman is?


Love. You have such an Air of Frankness and Generosity, that I will open
myself to you: I have been married to him these two Years; I admired him for
his Understanding, his Sentiment, and Spirit; I thought myself as sincerely
loved by him, as my fond Heart could wish, but there is of late, such a strange
Revolution in his Temper, I know not what to make of it: -- Instead of the
Looks of Affection, and Expressions of Tenderness with which he used to meet
me, it is nothing now but cold, averted, superficial Civility. -- While abroad,
he runs on in a wild Career of Pleasure; and to my deep Affliction, has fixed
his Affections upon another Object.


Bell. If you mean to consult with me in regard to this Case, I am afraid you
have made a wrong Choice; there is something in her Appearance that affects me,
--Pray excuse me, Ma'am, you consider this Matter too deeply. -- Men will prove
false, and if there is nothing in your Complaint but mere Gallantry on his
side, -- upon my word, I can't think your Case the worse for that.


Love. Not the worse!


Bell. On the contrary, much better. If his Affections, instead of being
alienated, had been extinguished, he would have sunk into a downright stupid,
habitual Insensibility; from which it might prove impossible to recall him.--In
all Love's Bill of Mortality there is not a more fatal Disorder,--but your
Husband is not fallen into that Way.--By your Account, he still has Sentiment,
and where there is Sentiment, there is still Room to hope for an Alteration. --
But in the other Case, you have the Pain of seeing yourself neglected, and for
what? -- for nothing at all; -- the Man has lost all Sense of Feeling, and is
become to the warm Beams of Wit and Beauty, as impenetrable as an Ice-house.


Lov. I am afraid, Ma'am, he is too much the Reverse of this, too susceptible
of Impressions from every beautiful Object.


Bell. Why, so much the better, as I told you already;--some new Idea has
struck his Fancy, and he will be for a while, under the Influence of that.


Love. How light she makes of it!


Bell. But it is the Wife's Business to bait the Hook for her Husband with
Variety; and to draw him daily to herself:--That is the whole Affair, I would
not make myself uneasy, Ma'am.


Love. Not uneasy! when his Indifference does not diminish my Regard for him!
Not uneasy, when the Man I dote on, no Longer fixes his Happiness at home!


Bell. Ma'am, you'll give me leave to speak my Mind freely.--I have often:
observed, when the Fiend Jealousy is roused, that Women lay out a wonderful
deal of Anxiety and Vexation to no Account, when perhaps, if the Truth were
known, they, should be angry with themselves instead of their Husbands.


Love. Angry with myself, Madam! --Calumny can lay nothing to my Charge, --the
Virtue of my Conduct, Madam--


Bell. Look ye there now,--I would have laid my Life, you would be at that,--
that's the Folly of us all. -- But Virtue is out of the Question at present.--I
mean the want of Address, and proper Management! It is there that most Women
fail,--Virtue alone cannot please the Taste of this Age.-- It is La Belle
Nature, --Nature embellished by the Advantages of Art, that the Men expect
nowadays.


Love. But after being married s;o long, and behaving all that time with such
an Equality --


Bell. Ay, that Equality is the Rock so many split upon.--The Men are now so
immersed in Luxury, that they must have eternal Variety in their Happiness.


Love. She justifies him.


Bell. I'll tell you what; I would venture to lay a Pot of Coffee, that the
Person who now rivals you in your Husband's Affection, does it without your
good Qualities, and even without your Beauty, by the mere Force of agreeable
Talents, and Assiduity to please.


Love. I am afraid that Compliment --


Bell. Let me ask you, Ma'am, have you ever seen this formidable Person?


Love. I think I have.


Bell. What fort of a Woman, Pray?


Love. Formidable indeed!--She was described to me as one of charming, and rare
Accomplishments: And that is fatally too true!--I can see in her the sensible,
the spirited, the -- in short, in her I see my Ruin.


Bell. Never throw up the Cards for all that. -- Really, Ma'am, without
Compliment, you seem to have all the Qualities that can dispute your Husband's
Heart with any Body; but the Exertion of those Qualities, I am afraid, is
suppressed.--You'll excuse my Freedom.--You should counterwork your Rival, by
the very same Arts she employs.-- I know a Lady now in your very Situation, --
And what does she do? She consumes herself with eternal Jealousy; whereas, if
she would but employ half the Pains she uses in teasing herself, to vie vith
the Creature that has won her Husband from her, --to vie with her, I say, in
the Arts of pleasing, -- for it is there a Woman's Pride should be piqued, --
would she do that, take my word for it, Victory would declare in her Favour.


Love. Do you think so, Ma'am?


Bell. Think so!--I am sure of it,-- for there is this Advantage on her Side,
that Virtue is an Auxiliary in her Cause,--and Virtue is the best beautifying
Fluid for the Complexion; it gives a Lustre to the Features, that cannot be
equalled by any Artifice whatever.


Love. What can this mean? I begin to doubt.


Bell. But even Virtue herself must condescend to call in external Aid.--Her
own native Charms would do, if Men were perfect, but that is not the Case and
since Vice can assume Allurements, why should not Truth and Innocence have
additional Ornaments also?


Love. I begin to think Sir Brilliant has told me truth.


Bell. I have been married, Ma'am, and am a little in the Secret.--It is much
more difficult to keep a Heart than win one--After the fatal Words for better
for worse, the general way with Wives is to relax into Indolence, and while
they are guilty of no Infidelity, they think that is enough:--But they are
mistaken, there is a great deal wanting-- an Address, a Manner, a Desire of
pleasing -- an agreeable Contrast in their Conduct, of grave, and gay;--a
favourite Poet of mine,-- Prior, has expressed this very delicately.

Above the fixed and settled Rules
Of Vice, and Virtue, in the Schools,
The better Part should set before 'em
A Grace, a Manner, a Decorum

Love. But when the natural Temper --


Bell. The natural Temper must be forced, Home must be made a Place of Pleasure
to the Husband, and the Wife must throw infinite Variety into her Manner;-- in
short, she must, as it were, multiply herself, and appear to him fundry
different Women on different Occasions.--And this, I take to be the whole
Mystery; the Way to keep a Man.--But I run on at a strange Rate.-- Well, to be
sure, I'm the giddiest Creature. -- Ma'am, will you now give me leave to
enquire, how I came to have this Favour? Who recommended me to your Notice?--
And pray who was so kind as to intimate that I was acquainted with Mr.
Lovemore?


Love. I beg your Pardon for all the Trouble I have given you, and I assure
you, it is entirely owing to my being told that his Visits were requent here.


Bell. His Visits frequent here!--They have imposed upon you, I assure
you,--and they have told you, perhaps, that I have robbed you of Mr. Lovemore
's Heart!--Scandal is always buzzing about,--but, I assure you, I have not
meddled with his Heart,--Oh! Lute, I hear a Rap at the Door, I positively won't
be at home.


Did you call, Madam?


Bell. I am not at home.


It is Lord Etheridge, Ma'am,--he's coming up Stairs, the Servants told him you
were within.


Bell. Was ever any thing so cross? Tell him there is Company with me, and he
won't come in. Mignionet, run to him.


Love. Ma'am, I beg I may not hinder you.


Bell. Our Conversation begins to grow interestig, and I would not have you go
for the World. I won't see my Lord.


Love. I beg you will, don't let me prevent, I'll step into another Room.


Bell. Will you be so kind?--There is a Study of Books in that Room, if you
will be so obliging as to amuse yourself there, I shall be glad to resume this
Conversation again.--He shall not stay long.


Love. I beg you will be in no hurry, I can wait with Pleasure.


Bell. This is a Lover of mine; and a Husband, and a Lover should be treated in
the same manner; perhaps it will divert you to hear how I manage him. I hear
him on the Stairs, for Heaven's sake, make haste. Mignionet, show the Way.


This way, Madam, this way.


Bell. Let me see how I look to receive him


Bell. Etheridge! Walk in, my Lord.


A heavenly Image in the Glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her Eyes she rears.
Repairs her Smiles --

Bell. Repairs her Smiles, my Lord! I don't like your Application of that
Phrase. --Pray, my Lord, are my Smiles out of repair, like an old House in the
Country, that wants a Tenant?


Nay now, that's wresting the Words from their visible Intention.--You can't
suppose I thought you want Repair, whatever may be the Case, Ma'am, with regard
to the want of a Tenant.


Bell. And so you think I really want a Tenant! And perhaps you imagine too,
that I am going to put up a Bill, let,--Well, I swear, I don't think it would
be a bad Scheme. --I have a great mind to do so.


And he who has the Preference--


Bell. Will be very happy, I know you mean so. But I'll let it to none but a
single Gentleman, that you may depend upon.


What the Devil does she mean by that? She has not got an Inkling of the
Affair, I hope. --


Bell. And then it must be a Lease for Life,--but no Body will be troubled with
it --I shall never get it off my Hands.--Do you think I shall, my Lord?


Why that Question, Madam? You know I am devoted to you, even if it were to be
bought with Life.


Bell. Heavens! what a dying Swain you are! And does your Lordship really
intend to be guilty of Matrimony? -- Lord, what a Question have I asked?--Well,
to be sure, I am a very Mad-cap!--My Lord, don't you think me a strange
Mad-cap?


A Wildness like yours, that arises from Vivacity and Sentiment together,
serves only to exalt your Beauty, and give new Poignancy to every Charm.


Bell. Well, upon my word you have said it finely!--But you are in the right,
my Lord. -- I hate your pensive, melancholy Beauty, that sits like a well-grown
Vegetable in a Room for an Hour together, 'till at last she is animated to the
violent Exertion of saying yes or no, and then enters into a Matter-of-Fact
Conversion, "Have you heard the News? Miss Beverly is going to be married to
Captain Shoulderknot. --My Lord Mortgage has had another Tumble at Arthur 's,
Sir William Squanderstock has lost his Election. They say, short Aprons are
coming into Fashion again."


Oh, Lord! a Matter-of-Fact Conversation is insupportable.


Bell. Pray, my Lord, have you ever observed the manner of one Lady's accosting
another at Ranelagh? --She comes up to you with a demure Look of insipid
Serenity, -- makes you a solemn Salute -- "Ma'am, I am overjoyed to meet you,
-- you look charmingly. -- But, dear Madam, did you hear what happened to us
all the other Night? --We were going home from the Opera, Ma'am;--you know my
Aunt Roly-Poly, -- It was her Coach,-- there was she, -- and Lady Betty Fidget,
--Your most obedient Servant, Ma'am, Betty, you know, is recovered -- every
Body thought it over with her,--but Doctor Snakeroot was called in, no not
Doctor Snakeroot, Doctor Bolus it was, and so he altered the Course of the
Medicines,--and so my Lady Betty recovered;-- well, there was she and Sir
George Bragwell, --a pretty Man Sir George, --finest Teeth in the World, --Your
Ladyship's most obedient --We expected you last Night,--but you did not
come,--he! he!--And so there was he and the rest of us,--and so turning the
Corner of Bond-Street, the Villain of a Coachman --How do you do, Madam?--The
Villain of a Coachman overturned us all;--my Aunt Roly-Poly, was frightened out
of her Wits, and Lady Betty has been nervish ever since:--Only think of
that,--such Accidents in Life,--Ma'am, your most obedient,--I am proud to see
you look so well."


An exact Description, -- the very thing--ha! ha!


Bell. And then from this Conversation they all run to Cards,-- "Quadrille has
murdered Wit."


Ay, and Beauty too; for upon these Occasions, "the Passions in the Features
are--" I have seen many a beautiful Countenance change in a Moment, into
absolute Deformity; the little Loves and Graces that before sparkled in the
Eye, bloomed in the Cheek, and smiled about the Mouth, all fly off in an
Instant, and resign the Features which they before adorned, to Fear, to Anger,
to Grief; and the whole Train of fretful Passions.


Bell. Ay, and the Rage we poor Women are often betrayed into on these
Occasions--


Very true, Ma'am; and if by chance, they do bridle and hold in a little, the
Struggle they undergo is the most ridiculous Sight imaginable. --I have seen an
Oath quivering upon the pale Lip of a reigning Toast, for Half an Hour
together; yes, and I have seen an uplifted Eye blaspheming Providence for the
Loss of an odd Trick;--and then at last, when the whole Room burst out into one
loud universal Uproar,--"My Lord, you flung away the Game.--No, Ma'am, it was
you.--Sir George, why did not you rough the Diamond? Capt. Hazard, why did not
you lead through the Honour? Ma'am, it was not the Play.-- Pardon me, Sir,
--But Ma'am,--But Sir,-- I would not play with you for Straws.--Don't you know
what Hoyle says? If A and B are Partners against C and D, and the Game
Nine-all, A and B have won three Tricks, and C and D four Tricks; C leads his
Suit, D puts up the King then returns the Suit, A passes, C puts up the Queen,
B roughs the next:" and so A and B, and C and D are banged about; and all is
Jargon, Confusion, Uproar, and Wrangling, and Nonsense, and Noise. --Ha! ha!


Bell. Ha! ha! A fine Picture of a Rout; but one must play fometimes --we must
let our Friends pick our Pockets sometimes, or they'll drop our Acquaintance.--
Pray my Lord, do you never play?


Play, Ma'am!-- I must lie to the End of the Chapter, -- now and then out of
Necessity; -- otherwise, -- I never touch a Card.


Bell. Oh! very true, you dedicate your Time to the Muses; a downright rhyming
Peer. -- Do you know, my Lord, that I am charmed with your Song?


Are you?


Bell. I am indeed;--I think you'd make a very tolerable Vauxball Poet.


You flatter me, Ma'am.


Bell. No, as I live and breathe, I don't; -- and do you know that I can sing
it already? -- Come, you shall hear me, -- you shall hear it.


Attend all ye Fair, and I'll tell ye the Art
To bind every Fancy with ease in your Chains,
To hold in soft Fetters the conjugal Heart,
And banish from Hymen his Doubts and his

When Juno accepted the Cactus of Love,
At first she was handsome; she charming became;
With Skill the soft Passions it taught her to move,
To kindle at once, and to keep up the Flame.

It is this gives the Eyes all their Magic and Fire;
The Voice melting Accents; impassions the Kiss;
Confers the sweet Smiles that awaken Desire,
And plants round the Fair each Incentive to Bliss.

Thence flows the gay Chat, more than Reason that charms;
The eloquent Blush, that can Beauty improve;
The fond Sigh, the fond Vow, the soft Touch that alarms,
The tender Disdain, the Renewal of Love.

Ye Fair take the Cactus, and practise it's Art;
The Mind unaccomplished, mere Features are vain,
Exert your sweet Power, you conquer each Heart,
And the Loves, Joys and Graces, shall walk in your Train.

My Poetry is infinitely obliged to you, for the Embellishments your Voice and
Manner confer upon it.


BelL. Oh fulsome!--I sing horridly, and I look horridly; --How do I look, my
Lord? -- but don't tell me, -- I won't be told. -- I see you are studying a
Compliment, and I hate Compliments; -- well, what is it? let's hear your
Compliment, why don't you compliment me? -- I won't hear it now. -- But pray
now how came you to choose so grave a Subject as connubial Happiness?--Do you
think there is any such Thing on Earth as connubial Happiness?


Close and particular that Question; Husband.--I have known Ladies, who on the
Eve of their Wedding appeared like the very Graces, in a few Weeks after the
Ceremony become very Slatterns, both in their Persons and Understandings: no
Solicitude on their side to appear amiable. -- Distaste insinuates itself by
degrees into the Husband's Mind, the Bands of Hymen grow loose; and thus with
perhaps the best Disposition in the World, he is obliged to start wild, and
away he urges where Youth and a Career of Spirits hurry him; and so good-night
to all real and solid Happiness. -- But with one accomplished as you are, Ma'am
--


Bell. To be sure, with me no-body could be otherwise than happy; -- was not
that what you was going to say? -- I know it was.-- Well upon my word you have
drawn your Picture so well, that one would imagine you had a Wife at home to
sit for it.


Ma'am, Compliment, --a-- you are but laughing at me;--I I -- I, -- Zouns, I am
afraid she begins to smoke me, -- A very scanty Knowledge of the World will
serve: and -- and there is no need of one's own Experience in these Cases:--nor
had I talked so, were I not persuaded you will make an Exception to the general
Rule.


Bell. O lard, you are going to plague me again with your odious Solicitations,
but I won't hear 'em;-- you must be gone. -- If I should be weak enough to
listen to you, what would become of Sir Brilliant Fashion?


Sir Brilliant Fashion!


Bell. Yes, don't you know Sir Brilliant Fashion?


No, Ma'am, I don't know the Gentleman: -- I beg Pardon if he is your
Acquaintance, but from what I have heard of him, I should not choose him to be
among my Intimates.


Meg O Lute! I am frighted out of my Senses, -- The poor Lady--Where's the
Hartshorn-drops?


The Lady! What Lady?


Never stand asking what Lady, -- she has fainted away, Ma'am, all of a sudden.
Give me the Drops.--


Bell. Let me run to her Assistance.-- Adieu, my Lord,--I shall be at home in
the Evening;-- Mignionet step this Way.--My Lord, you'll excuse me; I expect
you in the Evening.


I shall wait on you, Ma'am. What Villain am I to carry on this Scheme, against
so much Beauty, Innocence, and Merit?--Ay, and to have the Impudence to assume
this Badge of Honour, to cover the most unwarrantable Purposes!--But no
Reflection, have her I must; and that quickly too.--If I don't prevail soon,
I'm undone-- she'll find me out:--Egad, I'll be with her betimes this Evening,
and press her with all the Vehemence of Love. -- Women have their soft,
unguarded Moments, and who knows? -- But to take the Advantage of the Openness
and Gaiety of her Heart! and then my Friend Sir Brilliant, will it be fair to
supplant him?--Prithee be quiet, my dear Con-science; don't you be meddling;
don't interrupt a Gentleman in his Amusements.-- Don't you know, my good
Friend, that Love has no Respect of Persons, knows no Laws of
Frienship;--besides it is all my Wife's Fault-- why don't she strive to make
home agreeable?

For foreign Pleasures, foreign Joy, I roam,
No Thought of Peace or Happiness at home.--
What the Devil is Madam Fortune at now?--Sir Brilliant, by all that's
odious!-- No Place to conceal in!--No Escape!--The Door is locked! --
Mignionet, Mignionet, open the Door.--


Meg


This cursed Star, and this Ribbon, will ruin me.--Let me get off this
confounded Tell-tale Evidence. --


Brill. My dear Madam, I most heartily rejoice--Ha!-- Lovemere!


Your Slave, Sir Brilliant, your Slave,


Brill. How is this? I did not think you had been acquainted here!


I came to look for you, --I thought to have found you here; -- and so I have
scraped an Acquaintance with the Lady, and made it subservient to your
Purposes.--I have been giving a great Character of you.


Brill. Well, but what's the matter?-- What are you fumbling about? --


'Sdeath have a care!--for Heaven's sake--


Brill. What the Devil ails you?


Taken so unaccountably,--my old Complaint.--Sir Brilliant, yours.


Brill. Zouns Man, you had best sit down.


Here's a Business,-- --pray let me pass;--my old Complaint.--


Brill. What Complaint?


I must have a Surgeon,--occasioned by the Stroke of a Tennis-Ball;--my Lord
Rackett's unlucky Left-hand:--Let me pass, there is certainly something forming
there,-- let me pass. -- To be caught is the Devil, do--Sir Brilliant, your
Servant.--There is certainly something forming.


Brill. What can this mean? I must have this explained.--Then Mrs. Lovemore 's
Suspicions are right; I must come at the Bottom of it.--Ay, ay;--there is
something forming here!--


Brill. My dear Mrs. Bellmour.


Bell. Heaven's! What brings you here?


Brill. I congratulate with myself upon the Felicity of meeting you thus at
home.


Bell. Your Visit is unseasonable, you must be gone.


Brill. Madam, I have a Thousand Things--


Bell. Well, well, another time.


Brill. Of the tenderest Import.


Bell. I can't hear you now;--fly this Moment: -- I have a Lady taken ill in
the next Room.


Brill Ay, and you have had a Gentleman taken ill here too.


Bell. Do you dispute my Will and Pleasure;--fly this Instant,


This way, Madam, here's more Air in this Room.


Bell. How do you find yourself, Ma'am? Pray sit down.


Love. My Spirits were too weak to bear up any longer, against such a Scene of
Villainy.


Bell. Villainy!--What Villainy!


Love. Of the blackest Dye! -- I see, Madam, you are acquainted with my
Husband.


Bell. Acquainted with your Husband!


Love. A Moment's Patience, Madam.--That Gentleman that was here with you is my
Husband.


Bell. Lord Etheridge your Husband!


Love. Lord Etheridge, as he calls himself, and as you have been made to call
him also, is no other than Mr. Lovemore.


Bell. And has he then been base enough to assume that Title, to ensnare me to
my undoing?


Well, for certain, I believe the Devil's in me, I am certainly a Witch, for I
always thought him a sly one.


Love. To see my Husband carrying on this dark Business,--to see the Man I have
loved, -- the Man I have esteemed, -- the Man, I am afraid, I must still love,
though esteem him again I cannot, -- to be a Witness to his complicated
Wickedness,--it was too much for Sensibility like mine,--I felt the Shock too
severely,--and sunk under it.


Bell. I am ready to do the same myself now. I sink into the very Ground with
Amazement. The first time I ever saw him was at old Mrs. Loveit 's, -- she
introduced him to me;--the Appointment was of her own making.


Love. You know her Character, I suppose, Madam.


Bell. She's a Woman of Fashion, and sees a great deal of good Company.


Love. Very capable of such an Action for all that.


Bell. Well, I could never have imagined that any Woman would be so base as to
pass such a Cheat upon me. Step this Moment, and give Orders never to let him
within my Doors again. obliged to you, Ma'am, for this Visit. To me it is
highly fortunate, but I am sorry for your Share in it, as the Discovery brings
you nothing but a Conviction of your Husband's Baseness.


Love. I'm determined to be no further uneasy about him, nor will I live a Day
longer under his Roof.


Bell. Hold, hold, make no violent Resolutions.--You'll excuse me, I can't help
feeling for you, and I think this Incident may be still converted to your
Advantage.


Love. That can never be,--I am lost beyond Redemption.


Bell. Don't decide that too rashly.--Come, come, a Man is worth thinking a
little about, before one throws the hideous thing away for ever. Besides, you
have heard his Sentiments. Perhaps you are a little to blame yourself.--We will
talk this very coolly. Ma'am, you have saved me,-- and I must now discharge the
Obligation.-- You shall stay and dine with me.


Love. I can't possibly do that, -- I won't give you so much Trouble.


Bell. It will be a Pleasure, Ma'am, --you shall stay with me, I will not part
with you, and I will lay such a Plan, as may ensure him yours for ever.--Come,
come, my dear Madam, don't you still think he has some good Qualities to
apologize for his Vices?


Love. I must own, I still hope he has.


Bell. Very well then, and he may still make Atonement for all; and let me tell
you, that a Man who can make proper Atonement for his Faults sold not be
entirely despised.--Allons!


End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Why, to be sure, Ma'am, it is so for certain, and your are very much in the
right of it.


Love. I fancy I am:--I see the Folly of my former Conduct, and I am determined
never to let my Spirits sink into a melancholy State again.


Why, that's the very thing, Ma'am, the very thing I have been always preaching
up to you.--Did not I always say, see Company, Ma'am, take your share of
Pleasure, and never break your Heart for any Man. This is what I always said.


Love. It's very well, you need not say any more now.


I always said so!--And what did the World say? Heavens bless her for a sweet
Woman! And a Plague go with him for an inhuman, barbarous, bloody, murdering
Brute.


Love. No more of these Liberties, I desire.


Nay, don't be angry,--they did say so indeed.--But dear Heart, how every Body
will be overjoyed, when they find you have plucked up a little,--as for me, it
gives me new Life, to have so much Company in the House, and such a Racketing
at the Door with Coaches and Chairs, enough to hurry a Body out of one's
Wits.--Lard, this is another thing, and you look quite like another thing,
Ma'am, and that Dress so becomes you, -- I suppose, Ma'am, you'll never wear
your Negligee again. It is not fit for you indeed, Ma'am.--It might pass very
well with some Folks, Ma'am, but the like of you --


Love. Prithee truce with your Tongue, and see who is coming up Stairs.


Love. Mrs. Bellmour, I revive at the Sight of you. Muslin, do you step down
Stairs, and do as I have ordered you.


What the Duce can she be at now? (


Bell. You see I am punctual to my time. -- Well, I admire your Dress of all
things.--Did you buy this Silk on Ludgate-Hill? --It's mighty pretty.


Love. I am glad you like it, -- But under all this Appearance of Gaiety, I
have at the Bottom but an aching Heart.


Bell. Be ruled by me, and I'll answer for the Event. --Why really, now you
look just as you should do. --Why should you neglect so fine a Figure?


Love. You are so civil, Mrs. Bellmour --


Bell. And so true too!-- what was beautiful before, is now heightened by the
additional Ornaments of Dress; and if you will but animate and inspire the
whole, by those Graces of the Mind, which I am sure you possess, the Impression
cannot fail of being effectual upon all Beholders, and even upon the depraved
Mind of Mr. Lovemore. -- You have not heard any thing of him since, --have you?


Love. No, -- no Account at all of him.


Bell. I can tell you something. -- He has been at my House. You know I had
promised to be at home for him, -- not being let in, my Servants tell me, he
was strangely disconcerted, knit his Brow, stormed, raved, wondered, and
expostulated, and then at last, went off as sulky as a Russian General, when a
Garrison refuses to capitulate.


Love. If he has no other Haunts, he may perhaps come home.


Bell. I wish he may. -- Well, and have you got together a deal of Company?


Love. Pretty well.


Bell. That's right,-- show him that you will consult your own Pleasure.--Is
Sir Brilliant of the Party?


Love. A--propos,--as soon as I came home I received a Letter from him; my Maid
had taken it in.--He there presses his Addresses with great Warmth, begs to see
me again, and has something particular to tell me,--you shall see it.--Oh!
Lute, I have not it about me,--I left it in my dressing Room, I believe; you
mall see it by and by, I took your Advice, and sent him word he might
come;--that Lure brought him hither immediately, -- he makes no doubt of his
Success with me.


Bell. Well! two such Friends as Sir Brilliant and Mr. Lovemore, I believe,
never existed!


Love. Their Falsehood to each other is unparalleled. -- I left Sir Brilliant
at the Whist-Table, as soon as the Rubber's out, he'll certainly quit his
Company in pursuit of me. -- ( Lovemore.


Bell. If it is, every thing goes on swimmingly.


Love. I hear his Voice, it is he. -- How my Heart beats!


Bell. Courage, and the Day's our own.--Where must I run?


Love. In there, Ma'am.--Make haste, --I hear his Step on the Stair-head,


Bell. Success attend you,--I am gone.


Love. alone. I am frightened out of my Senses,--what the Event may be I fear
to think,--but I must go through with it.


Love. Mr. Lovemore, you're welcome home.


Mrs. Lovemore, your Servant,


Love. It's somewhat rare to see you at home so early.


I said I would come home, did not I?--I always like to be as good as my word.
--What could she mean by this Usage? to make an Appointment, and break it thus
abruptly!


Love. He seems to muse upon it.


I can't tell what to make of it,-- she does not mean to do so infamous a Thing
as to jilt me. wonderfully tired.


Love. You an't indisposed, I hope, my Dear.


No, my Dear, -- I thank you, -- I am very well;--a little fatigued only, with
jolting over the Stones all the way from the City.--I stayed to dine with the
old Banker, --I have been there ever since I went out in the
Morning.--Confoundedly tired.--Where's William?


Love. Did you want any thing?


Only my cap and Slippers.--I am not in Spirits, I think,


Love. You never are in Spirits at home, Mr. Lovemore.


I beg your Pardon,-- I never am any where more cheerful, home,--very --very
happy!


Love. I can hear otherwise.--I'm informed that Mr. Lovemore is the Inspirer of
Mirth and good Humour wherever he goes.


Oh! you over-rate me; upon my Soul you do.


Love. I can hear, Sir, that no Person's Company is so acceptable to the
Ladies; that it is your Wit that inspirits every thing, --that you have your
Compliment for one, your Smile for another, a Whisper for a third, and so on,
Sir, -- you divide your Favours, and are every where, but at home, all Whim,
Vivacity, and Spirit.


No,--no,-- so?--I swear, I can't help laughing at the Fancy. --I all Whim,
Vivacity, and Spirit! I shall burst my Sides. --How can you banter one so?-- I
divide my Favours too! -- Oh, Heavens! -- I can't stand this Raillery,--such a
Description of me!--I that am rather saturnine, and of a serious Cast, and
inclined to be pensive! I can't help laughing at the Oddity of the Conceit.--Oh
Lord! Oh Lord! (


Love. Just as you please, Sir. --I see that I am ever to be treated with
Indifference. (


( Bellmour out of my Head. (


Love. If I had done any thing to provoke this Usage, -- this cold, insolent
Contempt--


I shall never be at rest 'till I know the Bottom of it. -- I wish I had done
with that Business entirely; but my Desires are kindled, and must be satisfied.



Love. What Part of my Conduct gives you Offence, Mr. Lovemore?


Still harping upon that ungrateful String!--but prithee don't set me a
laughing again. -- Offence! -- nothing gives me Offence, Child:--You know I am
very fond.-- --I like you of all Things, and think you a most admirable Wife;--
prudent, managing, -- careless of your own Person, and very attentive to
mine;-- not much addicted to Pleasure,--grave,--retir'd,-- and domestic; --
govern your House,-- pay the Tradesmen's Bills, -- Upon my Soul, a very good
Wife!--As good a Sort of a Wife have.--Where's William? -- I must go to Bed.--


Love. To Bed so early! -- Had not you better join the Company?


I shall not go out to Night.


Love. But I mean the Company in the Dining-Room.


What Company?


Love. That I invited to a Rout.


A Rout in my House!-- and you dressed out too!--What is all this?


Love. You have no Objection, I hope--


Objection!--no,--I like Company, you know, of all Things;--I'll go and join
them:--Who are they all?


Love, You know 'em all;-- and there's your Friend Sir Brilliant there,


Is he there?--I'm glad of it.--But pray now, how comes this about?


Love. I intend to do it often,


Do ye?


Love. Ay, and not look tamely on, while you revel luxuriously in a Course of
Pleasure; I shall pursue my own Plan of Diversion.


Do so, do so, Ma'am, the Change in your Temper will be very pleasing.


Love. I shall indeed, Sir, --I'm in earnest.


By all means follow your own Inclinations.


Love. And so I shall Sir, I assure ye

No more I pine,
Content is mine;
That Sunshine of the Breast!
The Pangs of Love;
No more I prove;
No Cares disturb my Rest.

What the Devil is come over her? and what in the Name of Wonder, does all this
mean?


Love. Mean Sir! -- it means -- it means--it means--how can you ask me what it
means?--Well to be sure, the Sobriety of that Question! -- Do you think a Woman
of Spirit can have Leisure to tell her Meaning, when she is all Air, Alertness,
Plcasure, and Enjoyment?


She's mad!--Stark mad!


Love. You're mistaken, Sir,-- not mad, but in Spirits, that's all;--no Offence
I hope.--Am I too flighty for you?--perhaps I am, -- you are of a saturnine
Disposition, inclined to think a little, or so.--Well don't let me interrupt
you; don't let me be of any Inconvenience.--that would be the impolitest
thing-- for a married Couple to interfere and encroach on each other's
Pleasures, -- Oh hideous! it would be gothic to the last Degree Ha! ha! ha!


-- Ma'am,--you, Ha! ha! you are perfectly right.


Love. Nay but I don't like that Laugh now,--I positively don't like it;
--can't you laugh out as you were used to do? for my part, I'm determined to do
nothing else all the rest of my Life.


This is the most astonishing thing! Ma'am, I don't rightly comprehend--


Love. Oh Lute! Oh Lute! -- with that important Face.--Well but come now, what
don't you comprehend?


There is something in this Treatment that I don't so well --


Love. Oh! are you there. Sir? -- How quickly they, who have no Sensibility for
the Peace and Happiness of others, can feel for themselves Mr. Lovemore! -- But
that's a grave Reflection, and I hate Reflection.


What has she got into her Head?-- This sudden Change, Mrs. Lovemore, let me
tell you, is a little alarming, and --


Love. Nay, don't be frightened, -- there is no harm in innocent Mirth, I hope;
--never look so grave upon it. -- I assure ye, Sir, that though on your Part,
you seem determined to offer constant Indignities to your Wife, -- and though
the Laws of Retaliation would in some sort exculpate her, if, when provoked to
the utmost,--exasperated beyond all enduring, she should in her Turn, make him
know what it is to receive an Injury in the tenderest Point--


Madam!


Love. Well, well, don't be frightened I say, I shall not retaliate: -- my own
Honour will secure you there; -- you may depend upon it.--You won't come and
play a Game at Cards?--Well, do as you like;--well,--you won't come? No, no, I
see you won't.--What say you to a Bit of Supper with us? --Nor that
neither?--Follow your Inclinations, it is not material where a body eats.--The
Company expects me; your Servant Mr. Lovemore, yours, yours.


before!--Laugh all the rest of my Life!--Laws of Retaliation! -- an Injury in
the tenderest Point! -- the Company expects me,--your Servant my Dear, yours,
yours!-- this?-- Some of her Female Friends have been tampering with her.
--Zouns! -- I must begin to look a little sharp after Madam. -- I'll go this
Moment into the Card-Room, and watch whom she whispers with, whom she ogles
with, and every Circumstance that can lead to--


Madam, Madam, -- here's your Letter,--I would not for all the World that my
Master --


What, is she mad too? What's the matter, Woman?


Nothing, Sir,--nothing,--I wanted a word with my Lady,--that's all, Sir.


You would not for the World that your Master,--What was you going'to say?
--What Paper's that?


Paper, Sir!


Let me see it.


Lard, Sir!--how can you ask a Body for such a thing. It's a Letter to me, Sir,
-- a Letter from the Country, -- a Letter from my Sister, Sir.--she bids me buy
her a Shiver de Fize Cap, and a Sixteenth in the Lottery; and tells me of a
Number she dreamt of, that's all, Sir,--I'll put it up.


Let me look at it,--give it me this Moment? Lovemore! -- Brilliant Fashion.
This is a Letter from the Country, is it?


That, Sir,--that is--no, Sir,--no, --that's not Sister's Letter.--If you'll
give me that back, Sir, I'll show you the right one.


Where did you get this?


Sir?


Where did you get it? -- Tell me Truth.


Dear heart, you fright a Body so --in the Parlour, Sir,--I found it there.


Very well!--Leave the Room.


The Devil fetch it, I was never so out in my Politics, in all my Days.


A pretty Epistle truly this seems to be,--let me read it.


"Permit me, dear Madam, to throw myself on my Knees, (for on my Knees I must
address you) and in that humble Posture, to implore your Compassion."--
Compassion with a Vengeance on him -- supplicating Eyes, languishing at your
Feet:" -- Very well, Sir, --"Can you find it in your Heart to persist in
Cruelty?--Grant me but Access to you once more, and in addition to what I
already said this Morning, I will urge such Motives"-- urge Motives, will ye
--"as will suggest to you, that you should no longer hesitate in Gratitude, to
reward him, who still on his Knees, here makes a Vow to you of eternal
Constancy and Love. Brilliant Fashion."

So; so! so!--your very humble Servant, Sir Brilliant Fashion! --This is your
Friendship for me, is it?--you're mighty kind indeed, Sir,--but I thank you as
much as if you had really done me the favour,-- and, Mrs Lovemore, I'm your
humble Servant too.-- She intends to laugh all the the rest of her Life! This
Letter will change her Note.-- Odso, yonder she comes along the Gallery, and
Sir Brilliant in full Chase of her.-- They come this way, -- could I but detect
them both now! -- I'll step aside, and who knows but the Devil may tempt 'em to
their undoing, -- at least I'll try, -- a polite Husband I am--There's the
Coast clear for you, Madam.

Love. I tell you, Sir Brilliant, your Civility is odious, -- your Compliments
fulsome, -- and your Solicitations impertinent, Sir.--I must make use of harsh
Language, Sir, -- you provoke me to it and I can't refrain.


Brill. By all my Hopes we are now conveniently alone, Solitude and Discontent
again, I hope, Madam! --Have a Care, my dear Mrs. Lovemore of a Relapse.


Love. No Danger of that, Sir, don't be solicitous about me. -- Why would you
leave the Company? let me entreat you to return, Sir.


Brill. By Heaven, there is more Rapture in being one Moment vis-a-vis with
you, than in the Company of a whole Drawing-Room of Beauties.--Round you are
melting Pleasures, tender Transports, youthful Loves, and blooming Graces, all
unfelt, neglected, and despised, by a tasteless, cold, languid, unimpassioned
Husband, while they might be all so much better employed to the Purposes of
Ecstasy and Bliss.


Love. I am amazed, Sir, at this Liberty,--what Action of my Life has
authorised such barefaced Assurance? -- and for what Reason do you think so
meanly of me, as to imagine that I have not a greater Regard for my Reputation,
and for what the World may say, Sir?


Brill. The World, Ma'am,--the World will justify you--she served him right
--they will all agree in it,--there will be but one Opinion about it, -- that
is, Ma'am, if the World should know it;--but our Loves may be as concealed, as
Secrets undiscovered yet by mortal Eye. -- By all that's soft, it goes down
with her like a Dish of Tea. convinced you, --and since the Time, the Place,
and mutual Ardor all concur --


Love. Sir, I am not to be treated in this Manner,-- and, I assure you, Sir,
that were I not afraid of the evil Consequences that might follow, I should not
hesitate a Moment to acquaint Mr. Lovemore with your whole Behaviour.


Brill. She won't tell her Husband then, --charming Creature, and Blessings on
her for so convenient a Hint,--she yields, by all that's wicked!--What shall I
say to overwhelm her Senses in a Flood of Nonsense?


Go my Heart's Envoys, tender Sighs make haste,--
Still drink delicious Poison from thy Eye, --
Raptures and Paradise
Pant on thy Lip, and to thy Heart be pressed.
Zoons, this is too much.


Brill. What the Devil's the Matter now? confounded Buckle is always plaguing
me.--My dear Boy, Lovemore, --I rejoice to see thee,


And have you the Confidence to look me in the Face?


Brill. I was telling your Lady here, of the most whimsical Adventure --


Don't add the Meanness of Falsehood, to the black Attempt of invading your
Friend's Happiness. -- I did imagine, Sir, from the long Intercourse that has
subsisted between us, that you might have had Delicacy enough, Feeling enough,
Honour enough, Sir,--not to meditate an Injury like this.


Brill. Ay, ay, it's all over, I'm detected. Lovemore, if begging your Pardon
for this Rashness will any ways atone--


No, Sir, nothing can atone. The Provocation you have given me, would justify
my drawing upon you this Instant, did not that Lady and this Roof protect you.


Brill. But Mr. Lovemore.


But, Sir --


Brill. I only beg--


Pray, Sir, -- Sir, I insist--I won't hear a word.


Brill. I declare, upon my Honour --


Honour! for Shame, Sir Brilliant, don't use the Word.


Brill. If begging Pardon of that Lady --


That Lady!--I desire you will never speak to that Lady.


Brill. Nay, but prithee, Lovemore.


No, Sir, no,--I have done with you for the present.--As for you, Madam, I am
satisfied with your Conduct.--I was indeed, a little alarmed, but I was a
Witness of your Behaviour, and I'm above harbouring low Suspicions.


Brill. Allow me but a Word --


No more, Sir, I have done --


Brill. Let me but explain--


Zoons!--I'll go into another Room to avoid you. conjured up here?--Zounds, let
me make my Escape out of the House.


Love. I'll secure this Door, -- you must not go, my Dear.


S'death, Madam, let me pass.


Love. Nay, you shall stay, I want to introduce an Acquaintance of mine to you.


I desire, Madam --


Bell. My Lord, my Lord Etheridge; I am heartily glad to see your Lordship.


Love. Do my Dear, let me introduce this Lady to you.


Here's the Devil and all to do!


Bell. My Lord, this is the most fortunate Encounter --


I wish I was Fifty Miles off.


Love. Mrs. Bellmour, give me Leave to introduce Mr. Lovemore to you.


Bell. No, my dear Ma'am, let me introduce Lord Etheridge to you. --


Brill. In the Name of Wonder, what is all this?


Love. My dear Ma'am, you're mistaken; this is my Husband.


Bell. Pardon me, Ma'am, it is my Lord Etheridge.


Love. My Dear, how can you be so ill-bred in your own House?--Mrs. Bellmour,
--this is Mr. Lovemore.


Are you going to toss me in a Blanket, Madam?--call up the rest of your
People, if you are.


Bell. Pshaw!--Prithee now, my Lord, leave off your Humours;--Mrs. Lovemore,
this is my Lord Etheridge, a Lover of mine, who has made Proposals of Marriage
to me,


Confusion! let me get rid of these two Furies.


Bell. --My Lord I say! my Lord Etheridge! -- won't your Lordship know me?


This is the most damnable Accident!


Bell. I hope your Lordship has not forgot your Appointment at my House this
Evening.


Ay now my Turn is come,


Bell. Prithee, my Lord, what have I done, that you treat me with this
Coldness? Come, come, you shall have a Wife, I will take Compassion on you.


Damnation! I can't stand this,


Bell. Come, cheer up, my Lord;-- What the duce, your Dress is altered!--What's
become of the Star and the Ribbon?--And so the gay, the florid, the magnisique
Lord Etheridge, dwindles down into plain Mr. Lovemore, the Married Man! Mr.
Lovemore, your most obedient, very humble Servant, Sir.


I can't bear to feel my myself in so ridiculous a Circumstance.


Bell. I beg my Compliments to your Friend Mrs. Leveit; and I am much obliged
to you both for your very honourable Desigs.--


I never was so ashamed in all my Life! --


Brill. So, so, so, all his Pains were to hide the Star from me.--The Discovery
is a perfect Cordial to my dejected Spirits.


Bell. Mrs. Lovemore, I cannot sufficiently acknowledge the Providence, that
directed you to pay me a Visit, though I was wholly unknown to you; and I shall
henceforth consider you as my Deliverer.


Zoons! It was she that fainted away in the Closet, and be damned to her
Jealousy,


Brill. By all that's whimsical, an odd sort of an Adventure this -- my Lord,
-- my Lord Etheriage, as the Man says in the Play, "Your Lordship's right
welcome back to Denmark."


Now he comes upon me.--Oh! I'm in a fine Situation,


Brill. My Lord, I hope that ugly Pain in your Lordship's Side, is abated.


Absurd, and ridiculous,


Brill. There is nothing forming there I hope, my Lord.


Love.


Brill. Pray, my Lord, don't you think it a base Thing to invade the Happiness
of a Friend? Or to do him a clandestine Wrong? or to injure him with the Woman
he loves?


To cut the Matter short with you, Sir, we are both Rascals.


Brill. Rascal!


Ay both! We are two very pretty Fellows indeed!


Bell. I am glad to find that you are at length awakened into a Sense of your
Error.


I am, Madam, and I am frank enough to own it. -- I am above attempting to
disguise my Feelings, when I am conscious they are on the Side of Truth and
Honour;-- and Madam, with a true Remorse, -- I ask your Pardon.


Bell. Upon certain Terms, I don't know but I may sign and seal your Pardon.


Terms! What Terms?--


Bell. That you make due Expiation of your Guilt to that Lady.


That Lady, Ma'am! -- That Lady has no Reason to complain.


Love. No Reason to complain, Mr. Lovemore!


No Madam, -- none! for whatever may have been my Imprudences, they have had
their Source in your Conduct.


Love. In my Conduct, Sir!


In your Conduct!--I here declare before this Company, --and I am above
palliating the Matter, I here declare, that no Man in England could be better
inclined to domestic Happiness, if you, Madam, on your Part, had been willing
to make Home agreeable.


Love. There I confess he touches me.


You could take Pains enough before Marriage, -- you would put forth all your
Charms,--practice all your Arts,--and make your Features please by Rule;--for
ever changing, -- running an eternal Round of Variety: --And all this to win my
Affections: -- But when you had won them, you did not think them worth your
keeping.-- Never dressed, -- pensive, -- silent, --melancholy;--and the only
Entertainment in my House, was the dear Pleasure of a dull conjugal
Tete-a-Tete; and all this Insipidity, because you think the sole Merit of a
Wife consists in her Virtue:--A fine Way of amusing a Husband truly!


Brill. Upon my Soul, and so it is.--


O Gemini! Gemini! here's such a Piece of work,--what shall I do?-- my poor
dear Lady!


Is the Woman crazy?


Oh! Madam, -- forgive me, my dear Madam,--I did not do it on purpose,-- as I
hope for Mercy, I did not.


Love. What did not you do?


I did not intend to give it him, I would have seen him gibbeted first. -- I
found the Letter in the Parlour, Madam, --I knew it was the same Letter I had
delivered to you, and my Curiosity did make me peep into it. -- Says my
Curiosity, -- "Now, Muslin, you may gratify yourself by finding out the
Contents of that Letter, which you have such a violent Itching for." -- My
Curiosity said so, Ma'am, and then, I own, Ma'am, my Respect for you did say to
me, " Hussy, how dare you meddle with what does not belong to you?-- keep your
Distance, and let your Mistress's Secrets alone."--But then upon that, in comes
my Curiosity again, and says my Curiosity, "Read it, I tell you, Muslin, a
Woman of Spirit should know every thing."--"Let it alone, you Jade," says my
Respect.--"It's as much as your Place is worth."--"There's more Places than
one," says my Curiosity, "and so read it, I tell you, Muslin," --I did read it,
-- what could I do? Heaven help me, --I did read it,--I don't go to deny it,--I
don't, I don't.


Don't keep such an Uproar, Woman.


And then, after I read it, thinks me, I, I'll give this to my Mistress
directly, and that persidious thing her Husband shall not see it; -- and so as
my ill Stars would would have it, as I was looking for you, I run my hand full
in the Lion's mouth.


Brill. What an unlucky Jade it has been!


Love. Well have done, Muslin; this is too much.


Bell. Upon my word but she gives him his own.--I suppose you own the Truth of
what she says, Mr. Lovemore.


Pray, Madam, does that Lady own the Truth of what I have said?


Love. Sir, I am sensible there is too much Truth in what you say; this Lady
has opened my Eyes, and convinced me that there was a Mistake in my former
Conduct.


Come, come, you need not say any more--I forgive you,--I forgive you.


Love. Forgive me! I like that Air of Confidence, when you know, that on my
Side, it is at worst, an Error in Judgment, whereas on yours --


Bell. Come, come, you know each other's Faults and Virtues, and so you have
nothing to do but to mend the former, and enjoy the latter.--There, -- there,
kiss and Friends.--There, Mrs. Lovemore, take your reclaimed Libertine to your
Arms.


It is in your Power, Madam, to make a reclaimed Libertine of me indeed.


Love. From this Moment it shall be our mutual Study to please each other.


Brill. Lovemore, may I presume to hope for Pardon at that Lady's Hands?


My dear Confederate in Vice, your Pardon is granted.--Two sad Dogs we have
been,--but come, give us your Hand,--we have used each other damnably--for the
future we will endeavour to make each other amends.


Brill. And so we will.--Ma'am, since my Lord decamps from before the Town, may
I presume to hope--


Bell. I positively forbid you the least Grain of Hope; whenever I take to
myself a Husband, I must be convinced first that he will answer the Trouble of
keeping him.


Brill. My dear Ma'am, by all that's--


Bell. No Swearing--I positively will have my own way; you shall perform
Quarantine before I speak to you again.


She's yours Man, she's yours, -- she'll throw herself into your Arms in a Day
or two.-- And now I heartily congratulate the whole Company, that this Business
has had so happy a Tendency to convince each of us of our Folly.


Bell. Pray, Sir, don't draw me into Share of your Folly.


Come, come, my dear Ma'am, you are not without your Share of it. This will
teach you for the future, to be content with one Lover at a time, without
listening to a Fellow you know nothing of, -- because he assumes a Title, and
reports well of himself.


Bell. The Reproof is just, I grant it.


Come, let us join the Company cheerfully, keep our own Secrets, and not make
ourselves a Town-Talk;-- though, I don't know but if this Transaction were sent
abroad into the World, it might prove a very useful Lesson. The Men would see
how their Paffions may carry them into the Danger of wounding the Bosom of a
Friend,-- the Ladies would learn, that after the Marriage Rites, they should
not suffer their Powers of pleasing to languish away, but should still remember
to sacrifice to the Graces.

To win a Man, when all your Pains succeed.
The Way to Keep Him, is a Task indeed.

FINIS.
Just Published. Price 1s. 6d.

Adorned with a neat Frontispiece.

THE DESERT ISLAND. A Dramatic Poem. In Three Acts. As it is now performing at
the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane.

Te Dulcis Conjux, solo te in littore secum, Te veniente die, te decedente
canebat. VERGE.

By Mr. MURPHY.

Printed for P. Vaillant, facing Southampton-street, Strand.

Where may be had, by the same Author.

The ORPHAN of CHINA, a Tragedy. Price 1s. 6d.
The APPRENTICE, A Farce. In Two Acts. Price 1s.
The UPHOLSTERER. A Farce. In Two Acts. Price 1s.


