THE PROGRESS OF ENVY.
I.
AH me! unhappy State of mortal Wight,
Sith ENVY'S sure Attendant upon Fame,
No doth she rest from rancorous Despite,
Until she works him mickle Woe and Shame;
Unhappy he whom ENVY thus doth spoil,
No doth she check her ever restless Hate,
Until she doth his Reputation foil:
Ah! luckless Imp is he, whose Worth elate,
Forces him pay this heavy Tax for being great.
II.
There stood an ancient Mount, yclept Parnass,
(The fair Domain of sacred Poesy)
Which, with fresh Odours ever-blooming, was
Besprinkled with the Dew of Castaly;
Which now in soothing Murmurs whispering glides,
Wat'ring with genial Waves the fragrant Soil,
Now rolls down the Mountain's steepy Sides,
Teaching the Vales full beauteously to smile,
Dame NATURE'S handy-work, not formed by labouring Toil.
III.
The MUSES fair these peaceful Shades among,
With skilful Fingers sweep the trembling Strings;
The Air in Silence listens to the Song,
And TIME forgets to ply his lazy Wings;
Pale-visag'd CARE, with foul unhallowed Feet,
Attempts the Summit of the Hill to gain,
No can the Hag arrive the blissful Seat;
Her unavailing Strength is spent in vain,
CONTENT sits on the Top, and mocks her empty Pain.
IV.
Oft PHOEBUS self left his divine Abode,
And here enshrouded in a shady Bower,
Regardless of his State, laid by the God,
And owned sweet Music's more alluring Power.
On either Side was placed a peerless Wight,
Whose Merit long had filled the Trump of FAME;
This FENCE'S darling Child was SPENSER hight,
Who piped full pleasing on the Banks of Tame,
That no less famed than He, and MILTON was his Name.
V.
In these cool Bow'rs they live supinely calm;
Now harmless talk, now emulously sing;
While VIRTUE, pouring round her sacred Balm,
Makes Happiness eternal as the Spring.
Alternately they sung; now SPENSER 'gan,
Of Jousts and Tournaments, and Champions strong;
Now MILTON sung of disobedient Man,
And Eden lost: The Bards around them throng,
Drawn by the wondrous Magic of their Prince's Song.
VI.
Not far from these, Dan CHASER, ancient Wight,
A lofty Seat on Mount Parnassus held,
Who long had been the MUSE'S chief Delight;
His reverend Locks were silvered over with Old;
Grave was his Visage, and his Habit plain;
And while he sung, fair Nature he displayed,
In Verse albeit uncouth, and simple Strain;
No mote he well be seen, so thick the Shade,
Which Elms and aged Oaks had all around him made.
VII.
Next SHAKESPEARE sat, irregularly great,
And in his Hand a magic Rod did hold,
Which visionary Beings did create,
And turned the foulest Dross to purest Gold:
Whatever Spirits rove in Earth or Air,
Or bad or good, obey his dread Command;
To his Behests these willingly repair,
Those awed by Terrors of his magic Wand,
The which not all their Powers united might withstand.
VIII.
Beside the Bard there stood a beauteous Maid,
Whose glittering Appearance dimmed the Even;
Her thin-wrought Vesture various Tints displayed.
FANCY her Name, ysprong of Race divine,
Her Mantle Wimpled. A Word used by Spenser for h^ng down. The Line enclosed
within Comma's is one of Fairfax 's in his Translation of Tesco. wimpled low,
her silken Hair,
Which loose down her well-turn'd Shoulders strayed,
'She made a Net to catch the wanton Air,'
Whose love-sick Breezes all around her played,
And seemed in Whispers soft to court the heavenly Maid.
IX.
And ever and anon she wav'd in Air
A Sceptre, fraught with all-creative Power:
She wav'd it round: Eftsoons there did appear
Spirits and Witches, Forms unknown before:
Again she lifts her wonder-working Wand;
Eftsoons upon the flowery Plain was seen
The gay Inhabitants of Fairy Land,
And blithe Attendants upon MOB their Queen,
In mystic Circles danced along the enchanted Green.
X.
On the other Side stood NATURE, Goddess fair;
A Matron seemed she, and of Manners staid;
Beauteous her Form, majestic was her Air,
In loose Attire of purest White arrayed:
A potent Rod she bore, whose Power was such,
(As from her Darling's Works may well be shown)
That often with its soul-enchanting Touch,
She raised or Joy, or cause the deep-felt Groan,
And each Man's Passions made subservient to her own.
XI.
But lo! thick Fogs from out the Earth arise,
And murky Mists the buxom Air invade,
Which with Contagion dire infect the Skies,
And all around their baleful Influence shed;
The infected Sky, which meanwhile was so fair,
With thick Cimmerian Darkness is overspread;
The Sun, which meanwhile shone without Compare,
Muffles in pitchy Veil his radiant Head,
And sore the Time sore-grieving, seeks his watery Bed.
XII.
ENVY, the Daughter of fell Acheron,
(The Flood of deadly Hate and gloomy Night)
Had left precipitate her Stygian Throne,
And through the frighted Heavens winged her Flight:
With careful Eye each Realm she did explore,
No mote she ought of Happiness observe;
For Happiness, alas! was now no more,
Sith every one from Virtue's Paths did swerve,
And trample on Religion base Designs to serve.
XIII.
At length, on blessed Parnassus seated high,
Their Temples circled with a Laurel Crown,
SPENSER and MILTON met her scowling Eye,
And turned her horrid Grin unto a Frown.
Full fast unto her Sister did she post,
There to unload the Venom of her Breast,
To tell how all her Happiness was crossed,
Sith others were of Happiness possessed:
Did never gloomy Hell send forth like ugly Pest.
XIV.
Within the Covert of a gloomy Wood,
When funeral Cypress star-proof Branches spread,
Overgrown with tangling Briers a Cavern stood;
Fit Place for Melancholy Dreary head. Gloominess. Dreary-head.
Here a deformed Monster joyed to won,
Which on fell Rancour ever was ybent,
All from the rising to the setting Sun,
Her Heart pursued Spite with black Intent,
No could her iron Mind at human Woes relent.
XV.
In flowing sable Stole she was yclad,
Which with her Countenance did well accord;
Forth from her Mouth, like one through Grief gone mad,
A frothy Sea of nauseous Foam was poured;
A ghastly Grin and Eyes acquaint, display
The Rancour which her hellish Thoughts contain,
And how, when Man is blessed, she pines away,
Burning to turn his Happiness to Pain;
MALICE the Monster's Name, a Foe to God and Man.
XVI.
Along the Floor black loathsome Toads do crawl,
Their Gullets swelled with Poison's mortal Bane,
Which ever and anon they spit at all
Whom hapless Fortune leads too near her Den;
Around her Waste, in Place of silken Zone,
A life-devouring Viper reared his Head,
Who no Distinction made twixt Friend and Foin,
But Death on ey'ry Side fierce, brandished,
Fly, reckless Mortals fly, in vain is Hardy-head. Courage. Hardy-head.
XVII.
Impatient ENVY, through the ethereal Waste,
With inward Venom fraught, and deadly Spite,
Unto this Cavern steered her panting Haste,
Enshrouded in a darksome Veil of Night.
Her inmost Heart burnt with impetuous Ire,
And fell Destruction sparkled in her Look,
Her ferret Eyes flashed with revengeful Fire,
A while contending Passions Utt'rance choke,
At length the Fiend in furious Tone her Silence broke.
XVIII.
Sister, arise: See how our Power decays,
No more our Empire thou and I can boast,
Sith mortal Man now gains immortal Praise,
Sith Man is blessed, and thou and I are lost:
See in what State Parnassus ' Hill appears;
See PHOEBUS self two happy Bards atween;
See how the God their Song attentive hears;
This SPENSER hight, that MILTON, well I when,
Who can behold unmoved seek heart-tormenting Scene?
XIX.
Sister, arise; no let our Courage droop,
Perforce we will compel these Mortals own,
That mortal Force unto our Force shall stoop;
ENVY and MALICE then shall reign alone:
Thou best has known to file thy Tongue with Lies,
And to deceive Mankind with specious Bait;
Like TRUTH accoutred, spreadest Forgeries,
The Fountain of Contention and of Hate:
Arise, unite with me, and be as meanwhile great.
XX.
The Fiend obeyed, and with impatient Voice--
Tremble, ye Bards, within that blissful Seat;
MALICE and ENVY shall overthrow your Joys,
Nor PHOEBUS self shall out Designs defeat.
Shall we, who under Friendship's feigned Veil,
Prompted the bold Archangel to rebel;
Shall we, who under Show of sacred Zeal,
Plunged half the Powers of Heaven in lowest Hell--
Such vile Disgrace of us no mortal Man shall tell.
XXI.
And now, more hideous rendered to the Sight,
By reason of her raging Cruelty,
She burnt to go, equipped in dreadful Plight,
And find fit Engine for her Forgery.
Her Eyes inflamed did cast their Rays askance,
While hellish Imps prepare the Monster's Car,
In which she might cut through the wide Expanse,
And find out Nations that extended far,
When all was pitchy dark, no twinkled one bright Star.
XXII.
Black was her Chariot, drawn by Dragons dire,
And each fell Serpent had a double Tongue,
Which ever and anon spit flaming Fire,
The Regions of the tainted Air among;
A lofty Seat the Sister-monsters bore,
In deadly Machinations close combined,
Dull FOLLY drove with terrible Uproar,
And cruel DISCORD followed fast behind;
God help the Man against whom such Caitiff Foesare joined.
XXIII.
Aloft in Air the rattling Chariot flies,
While Thunder harshly grates upon its Wheels;
Black pointed Spires of Smoke around them rise,
The Air depressed unusual Burden feels;
Detested Sight! In terrible Array,
They spur their fiery Dragons on amain,
No mote their Anger suffer cold Delay,
Until the wish'd-for Region they obtain,
And land their dingy Car on Caledonian Plain.
XXIV.
Here elder Son of MALICE long had dwelt,
A Wretch of all the Joys of Life forlorn;
His Fame on double Falsities was built:
(Ah! worthless Son, of worthless Parent born!)
Under the Show of Semblance fair he veiled
The black Intentions of his hellish Breast;
And by these guileful Means he more prevailed
Than had he open Enmity professed:
The Wolf more safely wounds when in Sheep's Clothing dressed.
XXV.
Him then themselves atween they joyful place,
(Sure Signs of Woe when such are pleased, alas!)
Then measure back the Air with swifter Pace,
Until they reach the Foot of Mount Parnass.
Hither in evil Hour the Monsters came,
And with their new Companion did alight,
Who long had lost all Sense of virtuous Shame,
Beholding worth with poisonous Despite;
On his Success depends their impious Delight.
XXVI.
Long burnt he sore the Summit to obtain,
And spread his Venom o'er the blissful Seat;
Long burnt he sore, but still he burnt in vain;
Mote none come then, who come with impious Feet.
At length, at unawares he out doth spit
That Spite, which else had to himself been Bane;
The Venom on the Breast of Milton lit,
And spread benumbing Death through every Vein;
The Bard, of Life bereft, fell senseless on the Plain.
XXVII.
As at the Banquet of Thyestes old,
The Sun is said to have shut his radiant Eye,
So did he now through Grief his Beams with-hold,
And Darkness to be felt overwhelmed the Sky;
Forth issued from their dismal dirk Abodes
The Birds attendant upon hideous Night,
Shriek-owls and Ravens, whose fell croaking bodes
Approaching Death to miserable Wight:
Did never Mind of Man behold seek dreadful Sight?
XXVIII.
APOLLO wails his Darling, done to die
By foul Attempt of ENVY'S fatal Bane;
The MUSES sprinkle him with Dew of Castaly,
And crown his Death with many a living Strain;
Hoary PARNASSUS beats his aged Breast,
Aged, yet ne'er before did Sorrow know;
The Flowers drooping their Despair attest,
The aggrieved Rivers querulously flow;
All Nature sudden groaned with sympathetic Woe.
XXIX.
But, lo! the Sky a gayer Livery wears,
The melting Clouds begin to fade apace,
And now the Cloak of Darkness disappears,
(May Darkness ever thus to Light give Place!)
Erst grieved APOLLO jocund Looks resumes,
The Nine renew their meanwhile cheerful Song,
No Grief PARNASSUS' aged Breast consumes,
Forth from the teeming Earth new Flowers sprung,
The plenteous Rivers flowed full peacefully along.
XXX.
The stricken Bard fresh vital Heat renews,
Whose Blood, erst stagnate, rushes through his Veins;
Life through each Pore her Spirit doth infuse,
And FAME, by MALICE inexpulsive, reigns:
And see, a female Form, all heavenly bright,
Upheld by one of mortal Progeny,
A female Form, yclad in snowy White,
No half so fair at Distance seems as nigh;
DOUGLAS and TRUTH appear, ENVY and LAUDER die.
FINIS.

