LIKE MASTER, LIKE MAN, andc.
ACT I.
I Tell thee, I am satisfied, I'm in Love enough to be suspicious of every
Body.


And yet methinks, Sir, you should leave me out.


It may be so; I can't tell: but I'm not at Ease. If they don't make a Knave,
at least they'll make a Fool of thee.


I don't believe a Word on it: But good faith, Master* your Love makes somewhat
of you; I don't know what it is; but methinks when you suspect me, you don't
seem ^ Man of half those Parts I used to take you for. Look i^ my Face, it is
round and comely, not one hollow Line of ^ Villain in it: Men of my Fabric
don't use to be suspecte^ for Knaves; and when you take us for Fools, we never
tak^ you for wise men. For my Part, in this present Case, I tak^ myself to be
mighty deep. A Stander-by, Sir, sees more than a Gamester. You are pleased to
be jealous of your poo^ Mistress without a Cause, she uses you but too well, in
my humble Opinion; she sees you, and talks with you, till I am quite tired on
it sometimes; and your Rival that you are so scared about, forces a Visit upon
her, about once in a Fortnight.


Alas, thou art ignorant in these Affairs: He that's the civill'st received is
often the least cared for: Women appear warm to one, to hide a Flame for
another. Lorenzo in short appears too composed of late to be a rejected Lover,
and the Indifference he shows upon the Favours I seem to receive from her,
poisons the Pleasure I else should taste in them, and keeps me upon a perpetual
Rack. No--I would fain see some of his jealous Transports, have him fire at the
Sight o'me, contradict me whenever I speak, affront me wherever he meets me,
challenge me, fight me--


--Run you through the Guts.


But he's too calm, his Heart's too much at Ease, to leave me mine at Rest.


For my Part, Master, I'm not so great a Philosopher as you be, nor (thank my
Stars) so bitter a Lover, but what I see--that I generally believe; and when
Jacinta tells me she loves me dearly, I have good Thoughts enough of my Person
never to doubt the Truth on it. See, here the Baggage comes.


Hist! Jacinta! my Dear.


Who's that? Blunderbuss! Whore's your Master?


Hard by.


O, Sir, I'm glad I have found you at last; I believe I have travelled five
Miles after you, and could neither find you at home, nor in the Walks, nor at
Church, nor at the Opera, nor--


Nor any where else, where he was not to be found; if you had looked for him
where he was, it was ten to one but you had met with him.


I had, Jack-a-dandy!


But prithee, what's the Matter? Who sent you after me?


One who's never well but when she sees you, I think; it was my Lady.


Dear Jacinta, I fain would flatter myself, but am not able; the Blessing's too
great to be my Lot: Yet it is not well to trifle with me; how short soe'er I am
in other Merit, the Tenderness I have for Leonora claims something from her
Generosity; I should not be deluded.


And why do you think you are? methinks she's pretty well above board with you,
what must be done more to satisfy you?


Why, Lorenzo must hang himself, and then we are content.


How! Lorenzo!


If less will do, he'll tell you.


Why, you are not mad, Sir, are you? Jealous of him! Pray which Way may this
have got into your Head? I took you for a Man of Sense before.--Is this your
Doings. Log?


No forsooth, Pert, I'm not much given to Suspicion, as you can tell, Mrs.
Forward--If I were, I might find more Cause, I guess, than your Mistress has
given our Master here. But I have so many pretty Thoughts of my own Person,
Housewife, more than I have of yours, that I stand in dread of no Man.


That's the Way to prosper; however, so far I'll confess the Truth to thee; at
least if that don't do, nothing else will, Men are mighty simple in
Love-matters, Sir: When you suspect a Woman's falling off, you fall a plaguing
her to bring her on again, attack her with Reason, and a sour Face: Udslife,
Sir, attack her with a Fiddle, double your good Humour--give her a Ball--powder
your Periwig at her, --let her cheat you at Cards a little, and I'll warrant
ell's right again.


Say no more; I have been to blame, but there shall be no more on it.


I should punish you but justly however for what's past, if I carried back what
I have brought you; But I'm good natured, so here it is; open it, and see how
wrong you timed your Jealousy.


Car. If you love me with that Tenderness, you have made me long believe you
do, this Letter will be welcome; it is to tell you, you have Leave to plead a
Daughter's Weakness to a Father's Indulgence? and if you prevail with him to
lay his Commands upon me, you shall be as happy as my Obedience to them can
make you.

LEONORA.


Then I shall be what Man was never yet;


True Flesh and Blood, every Inch of her, for all that.


Obedience O happy, happy Carlos! But what shall I say to thee for this welcome
Message? Words-- But let this speak for me, and this, and this, and--


Hold, Sir; pray leave a little something for our Board-Wages. You can't carry
them all, I believe:


No; but you may carry--That, Sirrah.


the Jade's grown Purse-proud already.


Well, dear Jacinta, say something to your charming Mistress, that I am not
able to say myself: But above all, excuse my late unpardonable Folly, and offer
her my Life to expiate my Crime.


The best Plea for Pardon will be never to repeat the Fault.


If that will do, it is sealed for ever.


Enough; but I must be gone: Success attend you with the old Gentleman. Good-by
t'ye, Sir.


Eternal Blessings follow thee.


I think she has taken them all with her; the Jade has got her Apron full.


Is not that Lorenzo's Man coming this Way?


Yes, it is he. Shall I draw him on a Scotch Pair of Boots, Master, and make
him tell all?


Some Questions I must ask him; call him hither.


Hem, Lopes, hem!


Who calls?


I, and my Master.


I can't stay,


You can indeed, Sir.


Whither in such Haste, honest Lopes? What! upon some Love Errand!


Sir, your Servant; I ask your Pardon, but I was going--


I guess where; but you need not be shy of me any more, thy Master and I are no
longer Rivals, I have yielded up the Cause; the Lady will have it so, so I
submit.


Is it possible, Sir? Shall I then live to see my Master and you Friends again?


Yes; and what's better, thou and I shall be Friends too. There will be no more
Fear of Christian Bloodshed, I give thee up Jacinta; she's a slippery
Housewife, so Master and I are going to match ourselves elsewhere.


But is it possible, Sir, your Honour should be in Earnest? I'm afraid you're
pleased to be merry with your poor humble Servant.


I'm not at present much disposed to Mirth, my Indifference in this Matter is
not so thoroughly foamed; but my Reason has so far mastered my Passion, to show
me it is in vain to pursue a Woman whose Heart is already another. It is what I
have so plainly seen of late, I have roused my Resolution to my Aid, and broke
my Chains for ever.


Well, Sir, to be plain with you, this is the joyfullest News I have heard this
long Time; for I always knew you to be a mighty honest Gentleman, and good
Faith it often went to the Heart o'me to see you so abused. Dear, dear, have I
often said to myself (when they have had a private Meeting just after you have
been gone--


Ha!


Hold, Master, don't kill him yet.


I say I have said to myself, what wicked Things are Women, and what Pity it is
they should be suffered in a Christian Country; what a Shame they should be
allowed to play Will-in-the-Wisp with Men of Honour, and lead them through
Thorns and Briers and Rocks, and rugged Ways, till their Hearts are torn in
Pieces, like an old Coat in a FoxChace? I say, I have said to myself--


Thou hast said enough to thyself, but say a little more to me: Where were
these secret Meetings thou talk of?


In sundry Places, and by divers Ways; sometimes in the Cellar, sometimes in
the Garret, sometimes in the Court, sometimes in the Gutter; but the Place
where the Kiss of Kisses was given was--


In Hell.


Sir!


Speak, Fury, what dost thou mean by the Kiss of Kisses?


The Kiss of Peace, Sir; the Kiss of Union; the Kiss of Consummation.


Thou lie, Villain.


I don't know but I may, Sir.--What the Devil's the Matter now?


There's not one Word of Truth in all thy cursed Tongue has uttered.


No, Sir, I--I--believe there is not.


Why then did thou say it, Wretch?


O--only in Jest, Sir.


I am not in a jesting Condition.


Nor I--at present, Sir.


Speak then the Truth, as thou would do it at the Hour of Death.


Yes, at the Gallows, and be turned off as soon as I've done.


What's that you murmur?


Nothing but a short Prayer.


I am distracted, and fright the Wretch from telling me what I am upon the Rack
to know. Lopes, I am to blame to speak thus harshly to thee: Let this obtain
thy Pardon. see I'm disturbed.


Yes, Sir; I see I have been led into a Snare; I have said too much.


And yet thou must say more; nothing can lessen my Torment, but a farther
Knowledge of what causes my Misery. Speak then; Have I any Thing to hope?


Nothing; but that you may be a happier Bachelor, than my Master may probably
be a married Man.


Married, say thou?


I did, Sir, and I believe he'll say so too in a Twelve-month.


O Torment!--But give me more on it: when, now, to who, where?


Yesterday, to Leonora, by the Parson in the Pantry.


Look to it, if this be false, thy Life shall pay the Torment thou hast given
me: Be gone.


With the Body and the Soul o'me.


Base News, Master.


Now my insulting Rival's Smile speaks out: O cursed, cursed Women!


I'm come in Haste to tell you, Sir, that as soon as the Moon's up, my Lady
will give you a Meeting in the Close-Walk by the Back-Door of the Garden; she
thinks she has something to propose to you will certainly get her Father's
Consent to marry you.


Past Sufferance! this Aggravation is not to be borne: go, thank her--with my
Curses: Fly--and let them blast her, while their Venom's strong.


--Won't thou explain? What's this Storm for?


And dare thou ask me Questions, smooth-fac'd Iniquity, Crocodile of Nile,
Siren of the Rocks? Go, carry back the too gentle Answer thou hast received;
only let me add with the Poet:

We are no Fools, Trollop, my Master, nor me;
And thy Mistress may go--to the Devil with thee

sola. Am I awake!--I fancy not; a very idle Dream this. Well; I'll go talk in
my Sleep to my Lady about it; and when I awake, we'll try what Interpretation
we can make on it.


ACT II.
YOU see me as much enraged at it, as you are yourself, yet my Brain is roving
after the Cause, for something there must be; never Letter was received by Man
with more Passion and Transport; I was almost as charming a Goddess as
yourself, only for bringing it. Yet when in a Moment after I come with a
Message worth a dozen on it, never was Witch so handled; something must have
passed between one and t'other, that's sure.


Nothing could pass worth my enquiring after, since nothing could happen that
can excuse his Usage of me; he had a Letter under my Hand which owned him
Master of my Heart; and till I contradicted it with my Mouth, he ought not to
doubt the Truth on it.


Nay I confess, Madam, I ha'nt a Word to say for him, I'm afraid he's but a
Rogue at bottom, as well as my Shameless that attends him; we are bit, by my
Troth, and happily well enough served, for listening to the glib Tongues of the
Rascals.


Well: Let him laugh; let him glory in what he has done: He shall see I have a
Spirit can use him as I ought.


And let one Thing be your Comfort by the Way, Madam, that in spite of all your
dear Affections to him, you have had the Grace to keep him at Arms End. You
have not thanked me for it; but good Faith it was well I did not stir out of
the Chamber that fond Night. For there are Times the stoutest of us are in
Danger, the Rascals wheedle so.


In short, my very Soul is sir'd with this Treatment: and if ever that
perfidious Monster should relent, though he should crawl like a poor Worm
beneath my Feet, nay plunge a Dagger in his Heart, to bleed for Pardon; I
charge thee strictly, charge thee on thy Life, thou do not urge a Look to melt
me toward him, but strongly buy me up in brave Resentment; and if thou see
(which Heavens avert) a Glance of Weakness in me, rouse to my Memory the vile
Wrongs I have born, and blazon them with Skill in all their glaring Colours.


Madam, never doubt me; I'm charged to the Mouth with Fury, and if ever I meet
that Traitor of mine, such a Volley will I pour about his Ears--Now Heaven
prevent all hasty Vows; but in the Humour I am, methinks I'd carry my
Maiden-Head to my cold Grave with me, before I'd let it simper at the Rascal,
but come, come Madam we'll be revenged on them never fear.


Repulsed again! This is not to be borne. What though this Villain's Story be a
Falsehood, was I to blame to hearken to it? This Usage cannot be supported: How
was it she treated thee?


Never was Ambassado worse received. Madam, my Master asks ten thousand
Pardons, and humbly begs one Moment's Interview:--Be gone, you Rascal you.
Madam, what Answer shall I give my Master?-- Tell him he's a Villain. Indeed,
fair Lady, I think this is hasty Treatment--Here, my Footmen, toss me this
Fellow out at the Window; and away she went to her Devotions.


Did you see Jacinta.


Yes; she saluted me with half-a-score Rogues and Rascals too. I think our
Destinies are much alike, Sir: And o'my Conscience, a couple of scurvy Jades we
are hampered with.


Ungrateful Women, to receive with such Contempt so quick a Return of a Heart
so justly alarmed.


Ha, ha, ha.


What, no Allowance to be made to the first Transports of a Lover's Fury, when
roused by so dreadful an Appearance? As just as my Suspicions were, have I long
suffered them to arraign her?


No.


Have I waited for Oaths or Imprecations to clear her?


No.


Nay, even now is not the whole World still in suspense about her? whilst I
alone conclude her innocent.


It is very true.


She might, methinks, through this profound Respect, observe a Flame another
would have cherished; she might support me against groundless Fears, and save
me from a Rival's Tyranny; she might release me from these cruel Racks, and
would, no doubt, if she could, love as I do.


Ha, ha, ha


But since she don't, what do I whining here? Curse on the base Humilities of
Love.


Right.


Let Children kiss the Rod that fleas them, let Dogs lie down and lick the Shoe
that spurns them.


Ay.


I am a Man by Nature meant for Power; the Scepter's given us to wield, and we
betray our Trust whenever we meanly lay it at a Woman's Feet.


True, we are Men, boo--Come, Master, let us both be in a Passion; here's my
Sceptre, Muscovy? the Women there love the Men dearly; why? because-- should we
make with them; But this humble Love making spoils them all. A rare Way indeed
to bring Matters about with them; we are persuading them all Day they are
Angels and Goddesies, in Order to use them at Night like human Creatures; we
are like to succeed truly.


For my Part, I never yet could bear a Slight from any Thing, nor will I now.
There's but one Way however to resent it from a Woman; and that's to drive her
bravely from your Heart, and place a worthier in her vacant Throne.


Now with Submission to my Betters, I have another Way, Sir, I'll drive my
Tyrant from my Heart, and place myself in her Throne. Yes; I will be Lord of my
own Tenement, and keep my Household in Order. Would you, would do so too,
Master; for, look you, I have been Servitor in a College at Salamancha, and
read Philosophy with the Doctors; where I found that a Woman, in all Times, has
been observed to be an Animal hard to understand, and much inclined to
Mischief. Now as an Animal is always an Animal, and a Captain always a Captain,
so a Woman is always a Woman: Whence it is that a certain Greek says, her Head
is like a Bank of Sand; or, as another, a solid Rock; or, according to a third,
a dark Lantern. Pray, Sir, observe, for this is close Reasoning; and so as the
Head is the Head of the Body; and that the Body without a Head, is like a Head
without a Tail; and that where there is neither Head nor Tail, it is a very
strange Body: So I say a Woman is by Comparison, do you see (for nothing
explains things like Comparisons) I say by Comparison, as Aristotle has often
said before me, one may compare her to the raging Sea; for as the Sea, when the
Wind rises, knits its Brows like an angry Bull, and that Waves mount upon
Rocks, and Rocks mount upon Waves; that Porpoises leap like Trouts, and Whales
skip about like Gudgeons; that Ships roll like Beer Barrels, and Mariners pray
like Saints; just so, I say, a Woman--A Woman, I say, just so, when her Reason
is shipwrecked upon her Passion, and the Hulk of her Understanding lies thump,
thump, thumping against the Rock of her Fury; then it is, I say, that by
certain Immotions, which --um--cause, as one may suppose, a sort of
Convulsive--yes--hurricanious--um--like--in short, a Woman is like the Devil.
But here come the Crocodiles to weep us into Mercy.


Master, let us show ourselves Men, and leave their briny Tears to wash their
dirty Faces.


It is not in the Power of Charms to move me.


Nor me, I hope; and yet I fear those Eyes will ook out sharp to snatch up such
a Prize.


He's coming to us, Madam, to beg Pardon; but sure you'll never grant it him?


If I do, may Heaven ne'er grant me mine.


That's brave.


You look, Madam, upon me, as if you thought I came to trouble you with my
usual Importunities; I'll ease you of that Pain, by telling you, my Business
now is calmly to assure you, but I assure it you with Heaven and Hell for
Seconds; for may the Joys of one fly from me, whilst the Pains of t'other
overtake me, if all your Charms displayed ever shake my Resolution; I'll never
see you more.


Bon.


You are a Man of that nice Honour, Sir, I know you'll keep your Word; I
expected this Assurance from you, and came this Way only to thank you for it.


Very well.


You did, imperious Dame, you did: How base is Woman's Pride? How wretched are
the Ingredients it is formed of. If you saw Cause for just Disdain, why did you
not at first repulse me? Why lead a Slave in Chains, that could not grace your
Triumphs? If I am thus to be contemned, think on the Favours you have done the
Wretch, and hide your Face for ever.


Well argued.


I own you have hit the only Fault the World can charge me with; the Favours I
have done to you, I am indeed ashamed of; but since Women have their Frailties,
you'll allow me mine.


It is well, extremely well, Madam. I'm happy however, you at last speak
frankly. I thank you for it; from my Soul I thank you: but don't expect me
grovelling at your Feet again; don't, for if I do--


You will be treated as you deserve; trod upon.


Give me Patience;--but I don't want it; I am calm: Madam, farewell; be happy
if you can; by Heavens I wish you so, but never spread your Net for me again;
for if you do--


You'll be running into it.


Rather run headlong into Fire and Flames; rather be torn with Pincers Bit from
Bit--But I am wrong; this sounds like Passion, and Heaven can tell I am not
angry: Madam, I think we have no farther Business together; your most humble
Servant.


Farewell t'ye, Sir.


Come along.


Yet once more before I go (lest you should doubt my Resolution) may I starve,
perish, rot, be blasted, dead, damned, or any other Thing that Men or Gods can
think on, if on any Occasion whatever; Civil or Military, Pleasure or Business,
Love or Hate, or any other Accident of Life, I, from this Moment, change one
Word or Look with you


Content: Come away, Jacinta.


Yet one word, Madam, if you please; I have a little Thing here belongs to you,
a foolish Bauble I once was fond of.


Willingly, Sir; I have a Bauble too I think you have some Claim to; you'll
wear it for my Sake.


Most thankfully; this too I should restore you, if once was yours--

By your Favour, Madam--there is a Line or two in it, I think you did me once
the Honour to write with your own fair Hand. Here it is.

You love me, Carlos, and would know
The secret Movements of my Heart:
Whether I give you mine or no,
With yours, methinks, I'd never, never part.
Thus you have encouraged me, and thus you have deceived me.


Very true.


I have some faithful Lines too; I think I can produce 'em.


How long soe'er to sigh in vain
My Destiny may prove,
My Fate (in Spite of your Disdain)
Will let me glory in your Chain,
And give me Leave eternally to love.
There, Sir, take your Poetry again


It is not much the worse for my wearing; 'till serve again upon a fresh
Occasion.


Well done.


I believe I can return the Present, Madam, with-- a Pocket full of your
Prose--There--


Jacinta, give me his Letters. There, Sir, not to be behind hand with you.


And there, and there, and there, Sir.


'Cods my Life, we want Ammunition; but for a ^hift--There, and there, you
saucy Slut you.


I think, Madam, we have clearly the better on it.


For a Proof, I resolve to keep the Field.


Have a Care he don't rally and beat you yet though: pray walk off.


Fear nothing.


How the Armies stand and gaze at one another after the Battle; What think you,
Sir, of showing yourself a great General, by making an honourable Retreat?


I scorn it.


Sir!


I scorn it.


Oh!


Oh Leonora! Leonora! A Heart like mine should not be treated thus.


Carlos! Carlos! I have not deserved this Usage.


Barbarous Leonora! but it is useless to reproach you; she that is capable of
what you have done, is formed too cruel ever to repent of it Go on then,
Tyrant; make your Bliss complete; torment me still, for still, alas! I love
enough to be tormented.


Ah Carlos! little do you know the tender Movements of that Thing you name; the
Heart where Love presides, admits no Thought against the Honour of its Ruler.


It is not to call that Honour into Doubt, if conscious of our own
Unworthiness, we interpret every Frown to our Destruction.


When Jealousy proceeds from such humble Apprehensions, it shows itself with
more Respect than yours has done.


And where a Heart is guiltless, it easily forgives a greater Crime.


Forgiveness is not now in our Debate; if both have been in Fault, it is fit
that both should suffer for it; our Separation will do Justice on us.


But since we are ourselves the Judges of our Crimes, what if we should inflict
a gentler Punishment?


It would but encourage us to sin again.


And if it should--


It would give a fresh Occasion for the pleasing Exercise of Mercy.


Right; and so we act the Part of Earth and Heaven together, of Men and Gods,
and taste of both their Pleasures.


The Banquet's too inviting to refuse it.


Then thus let us fall on, and feed upon it for ever.


Ah Woman! foolish, foolish Woman!


Very foolish indeed


But don't expect I'll follow her Example.


You would, Mopsy, if I'd let you.


I'd sooner tear my Eyes out; ah--that she had a little of my Spirit in her.


I believe I shall sind thou hast a great deal of her Flesh, my Charmer; but
'twont do; I am all Rock, hard Rock, very Marble.


A very Pumice-stone, you Rascal you, if one would try thee; but to prevent thy
Humilities, and show thee all Submission would be in vain; to convince thee
thou hast nothing but Misery and Despair before thee, here--take back thy
paltry Thimble, and be in my Debt, for the Shirts I have made thee with it.


Nay, if y're at that 'port. Mistress, I believe I shall lose nothing by the
Balance of thy Presents. There take thy Tobacco-stopper, and stop thy--


Here--take thy Satin Pincushion, with thy curious half Hundred of Pins in it,
thou made such a vapouring about Yesterday: Tell them carefully, there's not
one wanting.


There's thy Ivory-hasted Knife again, whet it well; it is so blunt twill cut
nothing but Love.


And there's thy pretty Pocket Scissors, thou hast honoured me with, they'll
cut off a Leg or an Arm, Heaven bless them.


Here's the enchanted Handkerchief you were pleased to endear with your
precious Blood, when the Violence of your Love at Dinner, t'other Day made you
cut your Fingers.--There.


The Rascal so provokes me, I won't even keep his paltry Garters from him. Do
you see these? You pitiful, beggarly Scoundrel you:--There, take 'em, there.


I have but one Thing more of thine. it is the Top of all thy Presents, and
might be useful to me; but that thou may have nothing to upbraid me with, even
take it again with the rest of them.


Ah cruel Sancho!--Now beat me, Sancho, do.


Rather, like Indian Beggars, beat my precious self.
Rather let Infants Blood about the Streets,
Rather let all the Wine about the Cellar,
Rather let--*Oh Jacinta--thou hast overcome.
How foolish are the great Resolves of Man!
Resolves, which we neither would keep, nor can.
When those bright Eyes in Kindness please to shine,
Their Goodness I must needs return, with mine:
Bless my Jacinta in her Sancho's Arms--

And I my Sancho with Jacinta's Charms.


FINIS.

